TEXT: PUBLISHER’S NOTE Long before they were ever written down, poems were organized in lines. Since the invention of the printing press, readers have become increasingly conscious of looking at poems, rather than hearing them, but the function of the poetic line remains primarily sonic., NR: 1, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: publish note long ever written poem organ line sinc invent print press reader becom increasingli consciou look poem rather hear function poetic line remain primarili sonic
TEXT:  Whether a poem is written in meter or in free verse, the lines introduce some kind of pattern into the ongoing syntax of the poem’s sentences; the lines make us experience those sentences differently., NR: 2, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: whether poem written meter free vers line introduc kind pattern ongo syntax poem sentenc line make experi sentenc differ
TEXT:  Reading a prose poem, we feel the strategic absence of line. But precisely because we’ve become so used to looking at poems, the function of line can be hard to describe. As James Longenbach writes in The Art of the Poetic Line, “Line has no identity except in relation to other elements in the poem, especially the syntax of the poem’s sentences., NR: 3, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: read prose poem feel strateg absenc line precis becom use look poem function line hard describ art poetic line line ha ident except relat element poem especi syntax poem sentenc
TEXT:  It is not an abstract concept, and its qualities cannot be described generally or schematically. It cannot be associated reliably with the way we speak or breathe. Nor can its function be understood merely from its visual appearance on the page., NR: 4, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: abstract concept qualiti cannot gener schemat cannot associ reliabl way speak breath function understood mere visual appear page
TEXT: ” Printed books altered our relationship to poetry by allowing us to see the lines more readily. What new challenges do electronic reading devices pose? In a printed book, the width of the page and the size of the type are fixed., NR: 5, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: print book relationship poetri see line readili new challeng electron read devic pose print book width page size type fix
TEXT:  Usually, because the page is wide enough and the type small enough, a line of poetry fits comfortably on the page: What you see is what you’re supposed to hear as a unit of sound. Sometimes, however, a long line may exceed the width of the page; the line continues, indented just below the beginning of the line., NR: 6, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: usual page wide enough type small enough line poetri fit comfort page see suppos hear unit sound sometim howev long line may exceed width page line indent begin line
TEXT:  Readers of printed books have become accustomed to this convention, even if it may on some occasions seem ambiguous—particularly when some of the lines of a poem are already indented from the left-hand margin of the page., NR: 7, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: reader print book becom accustom convent even may occas seem ambigu particularli line poem alreadi indent left hand margin page
TEXT:  But unlike a printed book, which is stable, an ebook is a shape-shifter. Electronic type may be reflowed across a galaxy of applications and interfaces, across a variety of screens, from phone to tablet to computer., NR: 8, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: unlik print book stabl shape shifter electron type may across galaxi applic interfac across varieti screen phone tablet comput
TEXT:  And because the reader of an ebook is empowered to change the size of the type, a poem’s original lineation may seem to be altered in many different ways. As the size of the type increases, the likelihood of any given line running over increases., NR: 9, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: reader chang size type poem origin lineat may seem mani differ way size type increas likelihood given line run increas
TEXT:  Our typesetting standard for poetry is designed to register that when a line of poetry exceeds the width of the screen, the resulting run-over line should be indented, as it might be in a printed book., NR: 10, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: typeset standard poetri design regist line poetri width screen result run line indent might print book
TEXT:  Take a look at John Ashbery’s “Disclaimer” as it appears in two different type sizes. Each of these versions of the poem has the same number of lines: the number that Ashbery intended. But if you look at the second, third, and fifth lines of the second stanza in the right-hand version of “Disclaimer,” you’ll see the automatic indent; in the fifth line, for instance, the word ahead drops down and is indented., NR: 11, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: take look disclaim two differ type size version poem ha number line number intend look second third fifth line second stanza right hand version disclaim see automat indent fifth line instanc word ahead drop indent
TEXT:  The automatic indent not only makes poems easier to read electronically; it also helps to retain the rhythmic shape of the line—the unit of sound—as the poet intended it. And to preserve the integrity of the line, words are never broken or hyphenated when the line must run over., NR: 12, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: automat indent make poem easier read also help retain rhythmic shape line unit sound poet intend preserv integr line word never broken hyphen line must run
TEXT:  Reading “Disclaimer” on the screen, you can be sure that the phrase “you pause before the little bridge, sigh, and turn ahead” is a complete line, while the phrase “you pause before the little bridge, sight, and turn” is not., NR: 13, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: read disclaim screen sure phrase paus littl bridg sigh turn ahead complet line phrase paus littl bridg sight turn
TEXT:  Open Road has developed an electronic typesetting standard for poetry that ensures the clearest possible marking of both line breaks and stanza breaks, while at the same time handling the built-in function for resizing and reflowing text that all ereading devices possess., NR: 14, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: open road ha electron typeset standard poetri possibl mark line break stanza break time handl built function text devic possess
TEXT:  The first step is the appropriate semantic markup of the text, in which the formal elements distinguishing a poem, including lines, stanzas, and degrees of indentation, are tagged. Next, a style sheet that reads these tags must be designed, so that the formal elements of the poems are always displayed consistently., NR: 15, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: first step appropri semant markup text formal element distinguish poem line stanza degre indent tag next style sheet read tag must design formal element poem alway display consist
TEXT:  For instance, the style sheet reads the tags marking lines that the author himself has indented; should that indented line exceed the character capacity of a screen, the run-over part of the line will be indented further, and all such runovers will look the same., NR: 16, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: instanc style sheet read tag mark line author ha indent indent line exceed charact capac screen run part line indent look
TEXT:  This combination of appropriate coding choices and style sheets makes it easy to display poems with complex indentations, no matter if the lines are metered or free, end-stopped or enjambed. Ultimately, there may be no way to account for every single variation in the way in which the lines of a poem are disposed visually on an electronic reading device, just as rare variations may challenge the conventions of the printed page, but with rigorous quality assessment and scrupulous proofreading, nearly every poem can be set electronically in accordance with its author’s intention., NR: 17, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: combin appropri choic style sheet make easi display poem complex indent matter line free end stop enjamb ultim may way account everi singl variat way line poem dispos visual electron read devic rare variat may challeng convent print page rigor qualiti assess scrupul proofread nearli everi poem set accord author intent
TEXT:  And in some regards, electronic typesetting increases our capacity to transcribe a poem accurately: In a printed book, there may be no way to distinguish a stanza break from a page break, but with an ereader, one has only to resize the text in question to discover if a break at the bottom of a page is intentional or accidental., NR: 18, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: regard electron typeset increas capac transcrib poem accur print book may way distinguish stanza break page break one ha resiz text question discov break bottom page intent accident
TEXT:  Our goal in bringing out poetry in fully reflowable digital editions is to honor the sanctity of line and stanza as meticulously as possible—to allow readers to feel assured that the way the lines appear on the screen is an accurate embodiment of the way the author wants the lines to sound., NR: 19, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: goal poetri fulli digit edit honor sanctiti line stanza meticul possibl allow reader feel assur way line appear screen accur embodi way author want line sound
TEXT:  Ever since poems began to be written down, the manner in which they ought to be written down has seemed equivocal; ambiguities have always resulted. By taking advantage of the technologies available in our time, our goal is to deliver a more satisfying reading experience than ever before., NR: 20, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ever sinc poem written manner ought written ha equivoc ambigu alway take advantag technolog avail time goal deliv satisfi read experi ever
TEXT: ., NR: 21, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: With one long breath, caught and held in his chest, he fought his sadness over his solitary life. Don’t cry, you idiot! Live or die, but don’t poison everything … from an early draft of Herzog by Saul Bellow, NR: 22, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: one long breath caught chest fought sad solitari life cri idiot live die poison everyth earli draft bellow
TEXT: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to thank The American Academy of Arts and Letters for their Traveling Fellowship from June 1963 through June 1964 and the editors of the following magazines for their permission to reprint the following poems: The Carleton Miscellany: And One for My Dame, Consorting with Angels Critical Quarterly (England): Those Times …, Christmas Eve Encounter (England): Walking in Paris Harper’s Magazine: Mother and Jack and the Rain, For the Year of the Insane, Love Song The Hudson Review: Imitations of Drowning, To Lose the Earth, Crossing the Atlantic, Menstruation at Forty, Two Sons The New Yorker: The Sun; Three Green Windows; Little Girl, My Stringbean, My Lovely Woman; Your Face on the Dog’s Neck; Pain for a Daughter The Observer (England) (18 October 1964): Wanting to Die Poetry: Somewhere in Africa, KE 6–8018, The Wedding Night, Sylvia’s Death The Sewanee Review: The Legend of the One-eyed Man Tri-Quarterly: Suicide Note, The Addict, Protestant Easter, Man and Wife, Cripples and Other Stories, Live., NR: 23, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: would like thank academi art letter travel fellowship june june editor follow magazin permiss reprint follow poem miscellani one dame angel critic quarterli time eve encount walk harper magazin mother jack rain year insan love song review imit lose earth cross atlant menstruat forti two son new yorker sun three green window littl girl love woman face dog neck pain daughter observ want die poetri somewher wed night death review legend one eye man tri quarterli suicid note addict protest easter man wife crippl stori live
TEXT: AUTHOR’S NOTE To begin with, I have placed these poems (1962–1966) in the order in which they were written with all due apologies for the fact that they read like a fever chart for a bad case of melancholy. But I thought the order of their creation might be of interest to some readers, and, as Andr’ Gide wrote in his journal, “Despite every resolution of optimism, melancholy occasionally wins out: man has decidedly botched up the planet.” ANNE SEXTON, NR: 24, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: author note begin poem order written due apolog fact read like fever chart bad case melancholi thought order creation might interest reader wrote journal despit everi resolut optim melancholi occasion win man ha decidedli botch planet sexton
TEXT: AND ONE FOR MY DAME A born salesman, my father made all his dough by selling wool to Fieldcrest, Woolrich and Faribo. A born talker, he could sell one hundred wet-down bales of that white stuff. He could clock the miles and sales and make it pay., NR: 25, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: one dame born salesman father made dough sell wool born talker could sell one hundr wet bale white stuff could clock mile sale make pay
TEXT:  At home each sentence he would utter had first pleased the buyer who’d paid him off in butter. Each word had been tried over and over, at any rate, on the man who was sold by the man who filled my plate., NR: 26, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: home sentenc would utter first buyer butter word tri rate man wa sold man fill plate
TEXT:  My father hovered over the Yorkshire pudding and the beef: a peddler, a hawker, a merchant and an Indian chief. Roosevelt! Willkie! and war! How suddenly gauche I was with my old-maid heart and my funny teenage applause., NR: 27, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: father pud beef peddler hawker merchant chief war suddenli gauch wa old maid heart funni teenag applaus
TEXT:  Each night at home my father was in love with maps while the radio fought its battles with Nazis and Japs. Except when he hid in his bedroom on a three-day drunk, he typed out complex itineraries, packed his trunk, his matched luggage and pocketed a confirmed reservation, his heart already pushing over the red routes of the nation., NR: 28, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: night home father wa love map radio fought battl jap except bedroom three day drunk complex itinerari trunk luggag pocket confirm reserv heart alreadi push red rout nation
TEXT:  I sit at my desk each night with no place to go, opening the wrinkled maps of Milwaukee and Buffalo, the whole U.S., its cemeteries, its arbitrary time zones, through routes like small veins, capitals like small stones., NR: 29, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sit desk night place open wrinkl map buffalo whole cemeteri arbitrari time zone rout like small vein capit like small stone
TEXT:  He died on the road, his heart pushed from neck to back, his white hanky signaling from the window of the Cadillac. My husband, as blue-eyed as a picture book, sells wool: boxes of card waste, laps and rovings he can pull to the thread and say Leicester, Rambouillet, Merino, a half-blood, it’s greasy and thick, yellow as old snow., NR: 30, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: road heart neck back white hanki window husband blue eye pictur book sell wool box card wast lap rove pull thread say half blood greasi thick yellow old snow
TEXT:  And when you drive off, my darling, Yes, sir! Yes, sir! It’s one for my dame, your sample cases branded with my father’s name, your itinerary open, its tolls ticking and greedy, its highways built up like new loves, raw and speedy., NR: 31, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: drive darl ye sir ye sir one dame sampl case brand father name itinerari open toll tick greedi highway built like new love raw speedi
TEXT:  January 25, 1962., NR: 32, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: THE SUN I have heard of fish coming up for the sun who stayed forever, shoulder to shoulder, avenues of fish that never got back, all their proud spots and solitudes sucked out of them. I think of flies who come from their foul caves out into the arena. They are transparent at first. Then they are blue with copper wings. They glitter on the foreheads of men. Neither bird nor acrobat they will dry out like small black shoes. I am an identical being. Diseased by the cold and the smell of the house I undress under the burning magnifying glass. My skin flattens out like sea water. O yellow eye, let me be sick with your heat, let me be feverish and frowning. Now I am utterly given. I am your daughter, your sweet-meat, your priest, your mouth and your bird and I will tell them all stories of you until I am laid away forever, a thin gray banner. May 1962, NR: 33, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sun fish come sun stay forev shoulder shoulder avenu fish never got back spot solitud think fli come foul cave arena transpar first blue copper wing glitter forehead men neither bird acrobat dri like small black shoe ident diseas cold smell hous undress burn glass skin like sea water yellow eye let sick heat let feverish frown utterli given daughter sweet meat priest mouth bird tell stori laid away forev thin gray banner may
TEXT: FLEE ON YOUR DONKEY Ma faim, Anne, Anne, Fuis sur ton âne … Rimbaud Because there was no other place to flee to, I came back to the scene of the disordered senses, came back last night at midnight, arriving in the thick June night without luggage or defenses, giving up my car keys and my cash, keeping only a pack of Salem cigarettes the way a child holds on to a toy., NR: 34, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: flee donkey sur ton wa place flee came back scene disord came back last night midnight thick june night without luggag defens give car key cash keep pack cigarett way child hold toy
TEXT:  I signed myself in where a stranger puts the inked-in X’s— for this is a mental hospital, not a child’s game. Today an interne knocks my knees, testing for reflexes. Once I would have winked and begged for dope., NR: 35, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: stranger put mental hospit child game today knock knee test reflex would dope
TEXT:  Today I am terribly patient. Today crows play black-jack on the stethoscope. Everyone has left me except my muse, that good nurse. She stays in my hand, a mild white mouse. The curtains, lazy and delicate, billow and flutter and drop like the Victorian skirts of my two maiden aunts who kept an antique shop., NR: 36, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: today terribl patient today crow play black jack stethoscop everyon ha left except muse good nurs stay hand mild white mous curtain lazi delic billow flutter drop like skirt two maiden aunt kept antiqu shop
TEXT:  Hornets have been sent. They cluster like floral arrangements on the screen. Hornets, dragging their thin stingers, hover outside, all knowing, hissing: the hornet knows. I heard it as a child but what was it that he meant? The hornet knows! What happened to Jack and Doc and Reggy? Who remembers what lurks in the heart of man? What did The Green Hornet mean, he knows? Or have I got it wrong? Is it The Shadow who had seen me from my bedside radio? Now it’s Dinn, Dinn, Dinn! while the ladies in the next room argue and pick their teeth., NR: 37, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: hornet sent cluster like floral arrang screen hornet drag thin stinger hover outsid know hiss hornet know child wa meant hornet know jack doc heart man green hornet mean know got wrong shadow seen bedsid radio ladi next room argu pick teeth
TEXT:  Upstairs a girl curls like a snail; in another room someone tries to eat a shoe; meanwhile an adolescent pads up and down the hall in his white tennis socks. A new doctor makes rounds advertising tranquilizers, insulin, or shock to the uninitiated., NR: 38, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: upstair girl curl like snail anoth room someon tri eat shoe meanwhil adolesc pad hall white tenni sock new doctor make round advertis tranquil insulin shock uniniti
TEXT:  Six years of such small preoccupations! Six years of shuttling in and out of this place! O my hunger! My hunger! I could have gone around the world twice or had new children—all boys. It was a long trip with little days in it and no new places., NR: 39, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: six year small preoccup six year place hunger hunger could gone around world twice new child boy wa long trip littl day new place
TEXT:  In here, it’s the same old crowd, the same ruined scene. The alcoholic arrives with his golf clubs. The suicide arrives with extra pills sewn into the lining of her dress. The permanent guests have done nothing new., NR: 40, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: old crowd ruin scene alcohol golf club suicid extra pill sewn line dress perman guest done noth new
TEXT:  Their faces are still small like babies with jaundice. Meanwhile, they carried out my mother, wrapped like somebody’s doll, in sheets, bandaged her jaw and stuffed up her holes. My father, too. He went out on the rotten blood he used up on other women in the Middle West., NR: 41, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: face still small like babi jaundic meanwhil carri mother wrap like somebodi doll sheet jaw stuf hole father went rotten blood use woman middl west
TEXT:  He went out, a cured old alcoholic on crooked feet and useless hands. He went out calling for his father who died all by himself long ago— that fat banker who got locked up, his genes suspended like dollars, wrapped up in his secret, tied up securely in a straitjacket., NR: 42, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: went old alcohol crook foot useless hand went call father long ago fat banker got lock gene suspend like dollar wrap secret tie secur
TEXT:  But you, my doctor, my enthusiast, were better than Christ; you promised me another world to tell me who I was. I spent most of my time, a stranger, damned and in trance—that little hut, that naked blue-veined place, my eyes shut on the confusing office, eyes circling into my childhood, eyes newly cut., NR: 43, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: doctor enthusiast better anoth world tell wa spent time stranger damn tranc littl hut nake blue vein place eye shut offic eye circl childhood eye newli cut
TEXT:  Years of hints strung out—a serialized case history— thirty-three years of the same dull incest that sustained us both. You, my bachelor analyst, who sat on Marlborough Street, sharing your office with your mother and giving up cigarettes each New Year, were the new God, the manager of the Gideon Bible., NR: 44, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: year hint strung case histori thirti three year dull incest sustain bachelor analyst sat street offic mother give cigarett new year new god manag
TEXT:  I was your third-grader with a blue star on my forehead. In trance I could be any age, voice, gesture—all turned backward like a drugstore clock. Awake, I memorized dreams. Dreams came into the ring like third string fighters, each one a bad bet who might win because there was no other., NR: 45, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa third grader blue star forehead tranc could age voic gestur turn backward like drugstor clock awak dream dream came ring like third string fighter one bad bet might win wa
TEXT:  I stared at them, concentrating on the abyss the way one looks down into a rock quarry, uncountable miles down, my hands swinging down like hooks to pull dreams up out of their cage. O my hunger! My hunger! Once, outside your office, I collapsed in the old-fashioned swoon between the illegally parked cars., NR: 46, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: abyss way one look rock quarri uncount mile hand swing like hook pull dream cage hunger hunger outsid offic old fashion swoon illeg car
TEXT:  I threw myself down, pretending dead for eight hours. I thought I had died into a snowstorm. Above my head chains cracked along like teeth digging their way through the snowy street. I lay there like an overcoat that someone had thrown away., NR: 47, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: threw dead eight hour thought snowstorm head chain crack along like teeth dig way snowi street lay like overcoat someon thrown away
TEXT:  You carried me back in, awkwardly, tenderly, with the help of the red-haired secretary who was built like a lifeguard. My shoes, I remember, were lost in the snowbank as if I planned never to walk again., NR: 48, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: carri back awkwardli tenderli help red hair secretari wa built like lifeguard shoe rememb lost snowbank never walk
TEXT:  That was the winter that my mother died, half mad on morphine, blown up, at last, like a pregnant pig. I was her dreamy evil eye. In fact, I carried a knife in my pocketbook— my husband’s good L. L. Bean hunting knife., NR: 49, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa winter mother half mad morphin blown last like pregnant pig wa dreami evil eye fact carri knife pocketbook husband good bean hunt knife
TEXT:  I wasn’t sure if I should slash a tire or scrape the guts out of some dream. You taught me to believe in dreams; thus I was the dredger. I held them like an old woman with arthritic fingers, carefully straining the water out— sweet dark playthings, and above all, mysterious until they grew mournful and weak., NR: 50, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sure slash tire scrape gut dream taught believ dream thu wa dredger like old woman arthrit finger care strain water sweet dark playth mysteri grew mourn weak
TEXT:  O my hunger! My hunger! I was the one who opened the warm eyelid like a surgeon and brought forth young girls to grunt like fish. I told you, I said— but I was lying— that the knife was for my mother … and then I delivered her., NR: 51, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: hunger hunger wa one warm eyelid like surgeon brought forth young girl grunt like fish told said wa lie knife wa mother
TEXT:  The curtains flutter out and slump against the bars. They are my two thin ladies named Blanche and Rose. The grounds outside are pruned like an estate at Newport. Far off, in the field, something yellow grows., NR: 52, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: curtain flutter slump bar two thin ladi rose ground outsid like estat far field someth yellow
TEXT:  Was it last month or last year that the ambulance ran like a hearse with its siren blowing on suicide— Dinn, dinn, dinn!— a noon whistle that kept insisting on life all the way through the traffic lights? I have come back but disorder is not what it was., NR: 53, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa last month last year ambul ran like hears siren blow suicid noon whistl kept life way traffic light come back disord wa
TEXT:  I have lost the trick of it! The innocence of it! That fellow-patient in his stovepipe hat with his fiery joke, his manic smile— even he seems blurred, small and pale. I have come back, recommitted, fastened to the wall like a bathroom plunger, held like a prisoner who was so poor he fell in love with jail., NR: 54, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: lost trick innoc fellow patient stovepip hat fieri joke manic smile even blur small pale come back wall like bathroom plunger like prison wa poor fell love jail
TEXT:  I stand at this old window complaining of the soup, examining the grounds, allowing myself the wasted life. Soon I will raise my face for a white flag, and when God enters the fort, I won’t spit or gag on his finger., NR: 55, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: stand old window soup examin ground wast life soon rais face white flag god fort spit gag finger
TEXT:  I will eat it like a white flower. Is this the old trick, the wasting away, the skull that waits for its dose of electric power? This is madness but a kind of hunger. What good are my questions in this hierarchy of death where the earth and the stones go Dinn! Dinn! Dinn! It is hardly a feast., NR: 56, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: eat like white flower old trick wast away skull wait dose electr power mad kind hunger good question hierarchi death earth stone hardli feast
TEXT:  It is my stomach that makes me suffer. Turn, my hungers! For once make a deliberate decision. There are brains that rot here like black bananas. Hearts have grown as flat as dinner plates. Anne, Anne, flee on your donkey, flee this sad hotel, ride out on some hairy beast, gallop backward pressing your buttocks to his withers, sit to his clumsy gait somehow., NR: 57, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: stomach make suffer turn hunger make deliber decis brain rot like black banana heart grown flat dinner plate flee donkey flee sad hotel ride hairi beast gallop backward press buttock wither sit clumsi gait somehow
TEXT:  Ride out any old way you please! In this place everyone talks to his own mouth. That’s what it means to be crazy. Those I loved best died of it— the fool’s disease. June 1962., NR: 58, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ride old way pleas place everyon talk mouth mean crazi best fool diseas june
TEXT: THREE GREEN WINDOWS Half awake in my Sunday nap I see three green windows in three different lights— one west, one south, one east. I have forgotten that old friends are dying. I have forgotten that I grow middle-aged., NR: 59, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: three green window half awak nap see three green window three differ light one west one south one east forgotten old friend die forgotten grow middl age
TEXT:  At each window such rustlings! The trees persist, yeasty and sensuous, as thick as saints. I see three wet gargoyles covered with birds. Their skins shine in the sun like leather. I’m on my bed as light as a sponge., NR: 60, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: window rustl tree persist yeasti sensuou thick saint see three wet gargoyl cover bird skin shine sun like leather bed light spong
TEXT:  Soon it will be summer. She is my mother. She will tell me a story and keep me asleep against her plump and fruity skin. I see leaves— leaves that are washed and innocent, leaves that never knew a cellar, born in their own green blood like the hands of mermaids., NR: 61, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: soon summer mother tell stori keep asleep plump fruiti skin see leaf leaf wash innoc leaf never knew cellar born green blood like hand mermaid
TEXT:  I do not think of the rusty wagon on the walk. I pay no attention to the red squirrels that leap like machines beside the house. I do not remember the real trunks of the trees that stand beneath the windows as bulky as artichokes., NR: 62, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: think rusti wagon walk pay attent red squirrel leap like machin besid hous rememb real trunk tree stand beneath window bulki artichok
TEXT:  I turn like a giant, secretly watching, secretly knowing, secretly naming each elegant sea. I have misplaced the Van Allen belt, the sewers and the drainage, the urban renewal and the suburban centers., NR: 63, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: turn like giant secretli watch secretli know secretli name eleg sea van belt sewer drainag urban renew suburban center
TEXT:  I have forgotten the names of the literary critics. I know what I know. I am the child I was, living the life that was mine. I am young and half asleep. It is a time of water, a time of trees. June 1962., NR: 64, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: forgotten name literari critic know know child wa live life wa mine young half asleep time water time tree june
TEXT: SOMEWHERE IN AFRICA Must you leave, John Holmes, with the prayers and psalms you never said, said over you? Death with no rage to weigh you down? Praised by the mild God, his arm over the pulpit, leaving you timid, with no real age, whitewashed by belief, as dull as the windy preacher! Dead of a dark thing, John Holmes, you’ve been lost in the college chapel, mourned as father and teacher, mourned with piety and grace under the University Cross., NR: 65, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: somewher must leav prayer psalm never said said death rage weigh mild god arm pulpit leav timid real age belief dull windi preacher dead dark thing lost colleg chapel father teacher pieti grace univers cross
TEXT:  Your last book unsung, your last hard words unknown, abandoned by science, cancer blossomed in your throat, rooted like bougainvillea into your gray backbone, ruptured your pores until you wore it like a coat., NR: 66, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: last book unsung last hard word unknown abandon scienc cancer blossom throat root like gray backbon ruptur pore wore like coat
TEXT:  The thick petals, the exotic reds, the purples and whites covered up your nakedness and bore you up with all their blind power. I think of your last June nights in Boston, your body swollen but light, your eyes small as you let the nurses carry you into a strange land., NR: 67, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: thick petal exot red purpl white cover naked bore blind power think last june night boston bodi swollen light eye small let nurs carri strang land
TEXT:  … If this is death and God is necessary let him be hidden from the missionary, the well-wisher and the glad hand. Let God be some tribal female who is known but forbidden. Let there be this God who is a woman who will place you upon her shallow boat, who is a woman naked to the waist, moist with palm oil and sweat, a woman of some virtue and wild breasts, her limbs excellent, unbruised and chaste., NR: 68, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: death god necessari let hidden missionari well wisher glad hand let god tribal femal known forbidden let god woman place upon shallow boat woman nake waist moist palm oil sweat woman virtu wild breast limb excel unbruis chast
TEXT:  Let her take you. She will put twelve strong men at the oars for you are stronger than mahogany and your bones fill the boat high as with fruit and bark from the interior. She will have you now, you whom the funeral cannot kill., NR: 69, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: let take put twelv strong men oar mahogani bone fill boat high fruit bark interior funer cannot kill
TEXT:  John Holmes, cut from a single tree, lie heavy in her hold and go down that river with the ivory, the copra and the gold. July 1, 1962., NR: 70, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: cut singl tree lie heavi hold river ivori copra gold
TEXT: IMITATIONS OF DROWNING Fear of drowning, fear of being that alone, kept me busy making a deal as if I could buy my way out of it and it worked for two years and all of July. This August I began to dream of drowning., NR: 71, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: imit fear fear alon kept busi make deal could buy way work two year august dream
TEXT:  The dying went on and on in water as white and clear as the gin I drink each day at half-past five. Going down for the last time, the last breath lying, I grapple with eels like ropes—it’s ether, it’s queer and then, at last, it’s done., NR: 72, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: die went water white clear gin drink day half past five go last time last breath lie grappl eel like rope ether queer last done
TEXT:  Now the scavengers arrive, the hard crawlers who come to clean up the ocean floor. And death, that old butcher, will bother me no more. I had never had this dream before except twice when my parents clung to rafts and sat together for death, frozen like lewd photographs., NR: 73, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: scaveng arriv hard crawler come clean ocean floor death old butcher bother never dream except twice parent clung raft sat togeth death frozen like lewd photograph
TEXT:  Who listens to dreams? Only symbols for something— like money for the analyst or your mother’s wig, the arm I almost lost in the washroom wringer, following fear to its core, tugging the old string. But real drowning is for someone else., NR: 74, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: dream symbol someth like money analyst mother wig arm almost lost washroom wringer follow fear core tug old string real someon els
TEXT:  It’s too big to put in your mouth on purpose, it puts hot stingers in your tongue and vomit in your nose as your lungs break. Tossed like a wet dog by that juggler, you die awake. Fear, a motor, pumps me around and around until I fade slowly and the crowd laughs., NR: 75, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: big put mouth purpos put hot stinger tongu vomit nose lung break like wet dog juggler die awak fear motor pump around around fade slowli crowd laugh
TEXT:  I fade out, an old bicycle rider whose odds are measured in actuary graphs. This weekend the papers were black with the new highway fatalities and in Boston the strangler found another victim and we were all in Truro drinking beer and writing checks., NR: 76, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: fade old bicycl rider whose odd measur actuari graph weekend paper black new highway fatal boston strangler found anoth victim drink beer write check
TEXT:  The others rode the surf, commanding rafts like sleighs. I swam—but the tide came in like ten thousand orgasms. I swam—but the waves were higher than horses’ necks. I was shut up in that closet, until, biting the door, they dragged me out, dribbling urine on the gritty shore., NR: 77, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: rode surf command raft like sleigh swam tide came like ten thousand orgasm swam wave higher hors neck wa shut closet bite door drag urin gritti shore
TEXT:  Breathe! And you’ll know … an ant in a pot of chocolate, it boils and surrounds you. There is no news in fear but in the end it’s fear that drowns you. September 1962., NR: 78, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: breath know ant pot chocol boil surround news fear end fear
TEXT: MOTHER AND JACK AND THE RAIN I have a room of my own. Rain drops onto it. Rain drops down like worms from the trees onto my frontal bone. Haunted, always haunted by rain, the room affirms the words that I will make alone., NR: 79, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: mother jack rain room rain drop onto rain drop like worm tree onto frontal bone alway rain room word make alon
TEXT:  I come like the blind feeling for shelves, feeling for wood as hard as an apple, fingering the pen lightly, my blade. With this pen I take in hand my selves and with these dead disciples I will grapple., NR: 80, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: come like blind feel shelf feel wood hard appl finger pen lightli blade pen take hand self dead discipl grappl
TEXT:  Though rain curses the window let the poem be made. Rain is a finger on my eyeball. Rain drills in with its old unnecessary stories … I went to bed like a horse to its stall. On my damp summer bed I cradled my salty knees and heard father kiss me through the wall and heard mother’s heart pump like the tides., NR: 81, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: though rain curs window let poem made rain finger eyebal rain drill old unnecessari stori went bed like hors stall damp summer bed salti knee father kiss wall mother heart pump like tide
TEXT:  The fog horn flattened the sea into leather. I made no voyages, I owned no passport. I was the daughter. Whiskey fortified my father in the next room. He outlasted the weather, counted his booty and brought his ship into port., NR: 82, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: fog horn sea leather made voyag passport wa daughter whiskey father next room weather booti brought ship port
TEXT:  Rain, rain, at sixteen where I lay all night with Jack beside a tiny lake and did nothing at all, lay as straight as a bean. We played bridge and beer games for their own sake, filled up the lamp with kerosene, brushed our teeth, made sandwiches and tea and lay down on the cabin bed to sleep., NR: 83, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: rain rain sixteen lay night jack besid tini lake noth lay straight bean bridg beer game sake fill lamp kerosen brush teeth made sandwich tea lay cabin bed sleep
TEXT:  I lay, a blind lake, feigning sleep while Jack pulled back the wooly covers to see my body, that invisible body that girls keep. All that sweet night we rode out the storm back to back. Now Jack says the Mass and mother died using her own bones for crutches., NR: 84, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: lay blind lake feign sleep jack back cover see bodi invis bodi girl keep sweet night rode storm back back jack say mass mother bone crutch
TEXT:  There is rain on the wood, rain on the glass and I’m in a room of my own. I think too much. Fish swim from the eyes of God. Let them pass. Mother and Jack fill up heaven; they endorse my womanhood. Near land my ship comes about., NR: 85, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: rain wood rain glass room think much fish swim eye god let mother jack fill heaven endors womanhood near land ship come
TEXT:  I come to this land to ride my horse, to try my own guitar, to copy out their two separate names like sunflowers, to conjure up my daily bread, to endure, somehow to endure. October 1962., NR: 86, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: come land ride hors tri guitar copi two separ name like sunflow conjur daili bread endur somehow endur
TEXT: CONSORTING WITH ANGELS I was tired of being a woman, tired of the spoons and the pots, tired of my mouth and my breasts, tired of the cosmetics and the silks. There were still men who sat at my table, circled around the bowl I offered up., NR: 87, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: angel wa tire woman tire spoon pot tire mouth breast tire cosmet silk still men sat tabl circl around bowl
TEXT:  The bowl was filled with purple grapes and the flies hovered in for the scent and even my father came with his white bone. But I was tired of the gender of things. Last night I had a dream and I said to it … “You are the answer., NR: 88, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: bowl wa fill purpl grape fli scent even father came white bone wa tire gender thing last night dream said answer
TEXT:  You will outlive my husband and my father.” In that dream there was a city made of chains where Joan was put to death in man’s clothes and the nature of the angels went unexplained, no two made in the same species, one with a nose, one with an ear in its hand, one chewing a star and recording its orbit, each one like a poem obeying itself, performing God’s functions, a people apart., NR: 89, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: outliv husband father dream wa citi made chain wa put death man cloth natur angel went unexplain two made speci one nose one ear hand one star record orbit one like poem god function peopl apart
TEXT:  “You are the answer,” I said, and entered, lying down on the gates of the city. Then the chains were fastened around me and I lost my common gender and my final aspect. Adam was on the left of me and Eve was on the right of me, both thoroughly inconsistent with the world of reason., NR: 90, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: answer said lie gate citi chain around lost common gender final aspect wa left eve wa right thoroughli inconsist world reason
TEXT:  We wove our arms together and rode under the sun. I was not a woman anymore, not one thing or the other. O daughters of Jerusalem, the king has brought me into his chamber. I am black and I am beautiful., NR: 91, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wove arm togeth rode sun wa woman one thing daughter king ha brought chamber black beauti
TEXT:  I’ve been opened and undressed. I have no arms or legs. I’m all one skin like a fish. I’m no more a woman than Christ was a man. February 1963., NR: 92, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: undress arm leg one skin like fish woman wa man
TEXT: THE LEGEND OF THE ONE-EYED MAN Like Oedipus I am losing my sight. Like Judas I have done my wrong. Their punishment is over; the shame and disgrace of it are all used up. But as for me, look into my face and you will know that crimes dropped upon me as from a high building and although I cannot speak of them or explain the degrading details I have remembered much about Judas— about Judas, the old and the famous— that you overlooked., NR: 93, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: legend one eye man like lose sight like done wrong punish shame disgrac use look face know crime upon high build although cannot speak explain degrad detail much old famou
TEXT:  The story of his life is the story of mine. I have one glass eye. My nerves push against its painted surface but the other one waiting for judgment continues to see … Of course the New Testament is very small., NR: 94, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: stori life stori mine one glass eye nerv push paint surfac one wait judgment see cours new testament small
TEXT:  Its mouth opens four times— as out-of-date as a prehistoric monster, yet somehow man-made, held together by pullies like the stone jaw of a back-hoe. It gouges out the Judaic ground, taking its own backyard like a virgin daughter., NR: 95, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: mouth open four time date prehistor monster yet somehow man made togeth like stone jaw back hoe goug ground take like virgin daughter
TEXT:  And furthermore how did Judas come into it— that Judas Iscariot, belonging to the tribe of Reuben? He should have tried to lift him up there! His neck like an iron pole, hard as Newcastle, his heart as stiff as beeswax, his legs swollen and unmarked, his other limbs still growing., NR: 96, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: furthermor come belong tribe tri lift neck like iron pole hard heart stiff beeswax leg swollen unmark limb still grow
TEXT:  All of it heavy! That dead weight that would have been his fault. He should have known! In the first place who builds up such ugliness? I think of this man saying … Look! Here’s the price to do it plus the cost of the raw materials and if it took him three or four days to do it, then, they’d understand., NR: 97, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: heavi dead weight would fault known first place build ugli think man say look price plu cost raw materi took three four day understand
TEXT:  They figured the boards in excess of three hundred pounds. They figured it weighed enough to support a man. They said, fifteen stone is the approximate weight of a thief. Its ugliness is a matter of custom., NR: 98, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: figur board excess three hundr pound figur weigh enough support man said fifteen stone approxim weight thief ugli matter custom
TEXT:  If there was a mistake made then the Crucifix was constructed wrong … not from the quality of the pine, not from hanging a mirror, not from dropping the studding or the drill but from having an inspiration., NR: 99, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa mistak made crucifix wa wrong qualiti pine hang mirror drop stud drill inspir
TEXT:  But Judas was not a genius or under the auspices of an inspiration. I don’t know whether it was gold or silver. I don’t know why he betrayed him other than his motives, other than the avaricious and dishonest man., NR: 100, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa geniu auspex inspir know whether wa gold silver know motif avarici dishonest man
TEXT:  And then there were the forbidden crimes, those that were expressly foretold, and then overlooked and then forgotten except by me … Judas had a mother just as I had a mother. Oh! Honor and relish the facts! Do not think of the intense sensation I have as I tell you this but think only … Judas had a mother., NR: 101, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: forbidden crime expressli foretold forgotten except mother mother honor relish fact think intens sensat tell think mother
TEXT:  His mother had a dream. Because of this dream he was altogether managed by fate and thus he raped her. As a crime we hear little of this. Also he sold his God. March 1963., NR: 102, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: mother dream dream wa altogeth fate thu crime hear littl also sold god march
TEXT: LOVE SONG I was the girl of the chain letter, the girl full of talk of coffins and keyholes, the one of the telephone bills, the wrinkled photo and the lost connections, the one who kept saying— Listen! Listen! We must never! We must never! and all those things … the one with her eyes half under her coat, with her large gun-metal blue eyes, with the thin vein at the bend of her neck that hummed like a tuning fork, with her shoulders as bare as a building, with her thin foot and her thin toes, with an old red hook in her mouth, the mouth that kept bleeding into the terrible fields of her soul … the one who kept dropping off to sleep, as old as a stone she was, each hand like a piece of cement, for hours and hours and then she’d wake, after the small death, and then she’d be as soft as, as delicate as … as soft and delicate as an excess of light, with nothing dangerous at all, like a beggar who eats or a mouse on a rooftop with no trap doors, with nothing more honest than your hand in her hand— with nobody, nobody but you! and all those things., NR: 103, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: love song wa girl chain letter girl full talk coffin keyhol one telephon bill wrinkl photo lost connect one kept say listen listen must never must never thing one eye half coat larg gun metal blue eye thin vein bend neck like tune fork shoulder bare build thin foot thin toe old red hook mouth mouth kept bleed terribl field soul one kept drop sleep old stone wa hand like piec cement hour hour wake small death soft delic soft delic excess light noth danger like beggar eat mous trap door noth honest hand hand nobodi nobodi thing
TEXT: ., NR: 104, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: ., NR: 105, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: ., NR: 106, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: ., NR: 107, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT:  nobody, nobody but you! Oh! There is no translating that ocean, that music, that theater, that field of ponies. April 19, 1963., NR: 108, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: nobodi nobodi ocean music theater field poni
TEXT: MAN AND WIFE To speke of wo that is in mariage … We are not lovers. We do not even know each other. We look alike but we have nothing to say. We are like pigeons … that pair who came to the suburbs by mistake, forsaking Boston where they bumped their small heads against a blind wall, having worn out the fruit stalls in the North End, the amethyst windows of Louisburg Square, the seats on the Common And the traffic that kept stamping and stamping., NR: 109, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: man wife lover even know look alik noth say like pigeon pair came suburb mistak boston small head blind wall worn fruit stall north end amethyst window squar seat common traffic kept stamp stamp
TEXT:  Now there is green rain for everyone as common as eyewash. Now they are together like strangers in a two-seater outhouse, eating and squatting together. They have teeth and knees but they do not speak., NR: 110, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: green rain everyon common eyewash togeth like stranger two seater outhous eat squat togeth teeth knee speak
TEXT:  A soldier is forced to stay with a soldier because they share the same dirt and the same blows. They are exiles soiled by the same sweat and the drunkard’s dream. As it is they can only hang on, their red claws wound like bracelets around the same limb., NR: 111, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: soldier forc stay soldier share dirt blow exil soil sweat drunkard dream red claw wound like bracelet around limb
TEXT:  Even their song is not a sure thing. It is not a language; it is a kind of breathing. They are two asthmatics whose breath sobs in and out through a small fuzzy pipe. Like them we neither talk nor clear our throats., NR: 112, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: even song sure thing languag kind breath two asthmat whose breath sob small fuzzi pipe like neither talk clear throat
TEXT:  Oh darling, we gasp in unison beside our window pane, drunk on the drunkard’s dream. Like them we can only hang on. But they would pierce our heart if they could only fly the distance. May 1963., NR: 113, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: darl gasp unison besid window pane drunk drunkard dream like would pierc heart could fli distanc may
TEXT: THOSE TIMES … At six I lived in a graveyard full of dolls, avoiding myself, my body, the suspect in its grotesque house. I was locked in my room all day behind a gate, a prison cell. I was the exile who sat all day in a knot., NR: 114, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: time six live graveyard full doll bodi suspect grotesqu hous wa lock room day behind gate prison cell wa exil sat day knot
TEXT:  I will speak of the little childhood cruelties, being a third child, the last given and the last taken— of the nightly humiliations when Mother undressed me, of the life of the daytime, locked in my room— being the unwanted, the mistake that Mother used to keep Father from his divorce., NR: 115, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: speak littl childhood cruelti third child last given last taken nightli humili mother undress life daytim lock room unwant mistak mother use keep father divorc
TEXT:  Divorce! The romantic’s friend, romantics who fly into maps of other countries, hips and noses and mountains, into Asia or the Black Forest, or caught by 1928, the year of the me, by mistake, not for divorce but instead., NR: 116, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: divorc romant friend romant fli map countri hip nose mountain black forest caught year mistak divorc instead
TEXT:  The me who refused to suck on breasts she couldn’t please, the me whose body grew unsurely, the me who stepped on the noses of dolls she couldn’t break. I think of the dolls, so well made, so perfectly put together as I pressed them against me, kissing their little imaginary mouths., NR: 117, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: suck breast pleas whose bodi grew step nose doll break think doll well made perfectli put togeth kiss littl imaginari mouth
TEXT:  I remember their smooth skin, those newly delivered, the pink skin and the serious China-blue eyes. They came from a mysterious country without the pang of birth, born quietly and well. When I wanted to visit, the closet is where I rehearsed my life, all day among shoes, away from the glare of the bulb in the ceiling, away from the bed and the heavy table and the same terrible rose repeating on the walls., NR: 118, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: rememb smooth skin newli pink skin seriou china blue eye came mysteri countri without pang birth born quietli well visit closet life day among shoe away glare bulb ceil away bed heavi tabl terribl rose wall
TEXT:  I did not question it. I hid in the closet as one hides in a tree. I grew into it like a root and yet I planned such plans of flight, believing I would take my body into the sky, dragging it with me like a large bed., NR: 119, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: question closet one hide tree grew like root yet plan flight believ would take bodi sky drag like larg bed
TEXT:  And although I was unskilled I was sure to get there or at least to move up like an elevator. With such dreams, storing their energy like a bull, I planned my growth and my womanhood as one choreographs a dance., NR: 120, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: although wa unskil wa sure get least move like elev dream energi like bull growth womanhood one danc
TEXT:  I knew that if I waited among shoes I was sure to outgrow them, the heavy oxfords, the thick execution reds, shoes that lay together like partners, the sneakers thick with Griffin eyewash and then the dresses swinging above me, always above me, empty and sensible with sashes and puffs, with collars and two-inch hems and evil fortunes in their belts., NR: 121, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: knew among shoe wa sure outgrow heavi thick execut red shoe lay togeth like partner sneaker thick griffin eyewash dress swing alway empti sensibl sash puff collar two inch hem evil fortun belt
TEXT:  I sat all day stuffing my heart into a shoe box, avoiding the precious window as if it were an ugly eye through which birds coughed, chained to the heaving trees; avoiding the wallpaper of the room where tongues bloomed over and over, bursting from lips like sea flowers— and in this way I waited out the day until my mother, the large one, came to force me to undress., NR: 122, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sat day stuf heart shoe box preciou window ugli eye bird chain heav tree wallpap room tongu lip like sea flower way day mother larg one came forc undress
TEXT:  I lay there silently, hoarding my small dignity. I did not ask about the gate or the closet. I did not question the bedtime ritual where, on the cold bathroom tiles, I was spread out daily and examined for flaws., NR: 123, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: lay silent hoard small digniti ask gate closet question bedtim ritual cold bathroom tile wa spread daili flaw
TEXT:  I did not know that my bones, those solids, those pieces of sculpture would not splinter. I did not know the woman I would be nor that blood would bloom in me each month like an exotic flower, nor that children, two monuments, would break from between my legs two cramped girls breathing carelessly, each asleep in her tiny beauty., NR: 124, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: know bone solid piec sculptur would splinter know woman would blood would bloom month like exot flower child two monument would break leg two cramp girl breath carelessli asleep tini beauti
TEXT:  I did not know that my life, in the end, would run over my mother’s like a truck and all that would remain from the year I was six was a small hole in my heart, a deaf spot, so that I might hear the unsaid more clearly., NR: 125, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: know life end would run mother like truck would remain year wa six wa small hole heart deaf spot might hear unsaid clearli
TEXT:  June 1963., NR: 126, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: june
TEXT: TWO SONS Where and to whom you are married I can only guess in my piecemeal fashion. I grow old on my bitterness. On the unique occasion of your two sudden wedding days I open some cheap wine, a tin of lobster and mayonnaise., NR: 127, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: two son marri guess piecem fashion grow old bitter uniqu occas two sudden wed day open cheap wine tin lobster mayonnais
TEXT:  I sit in an old lady’s room where families used to feast where the wind blows in like soot from north-northeast. Both of you monopolized with no real forwarding address except for two silly postcards you bothered to send home, one of them written in grease as you undid her dress in Mexico, the other airmailed to Boston from Rome just before the small ceremony at the American Church., NR: 128, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sit old ladi room famili use feast wind blow like soot north northeast real forward address except two silli send home one written greas undid dress boston small ceremoni church
TEXT:  Both of you made of my cooking, those suppers of starch and beef, and with my library, my medicine, my bath water, both sinking into small brown pools like muddy otters! You make a toast for tomorrow and smash the cup, letting your false women lap the dish I had to fatten up., NR: 129, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: made cook supper starch beef librari medicin bath water sink small brown pool like muddi otter make toast tomorrow smash cup fals woman lap dish fatten
TEXT:  When you come back I’ll buy a wig of yellow hair; I’ll squat in a new red dress; I’ll be playing solitaire on the kitchen floor. Yes … I’ll gather myself in like cut flowers and ask you how you are and where you’ve been., NR: 130, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: come back buy wig yellow hair squat new red dress solitair kitchen floor ye gather like cut flower ask
TEXT:  July 22, 1963., NR: 131, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: TO LOSE THE EARTH To lose the earth you know, for greater knowing; to lose the life you have, for greater life; to leave the friends you loved, for greater loving; to find a land more kind than home, more large than earth … Thomas Wolfe The wreckage of Europe or the birth of Africa, the old palaces, the wallets of the tourists, the Common Market or the smart cafés, the boulevards in the graceful evening, the cliff-hangers, the scientists, and the little shops raising their prices mean nothing to me., NR: 132, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: lose earth lose earth know greater know lose life greater life leav friend greater love find land kind home larg earth wreckag birth old palac wallet tourist common market smart boulevard grace even cliff hanger scientist littl shop rais price mean noth
TEXT:  Each day I think only of this place, only this place where the musician works. He plays his flute in a cave that a pharaoh built by the sea. He is blowing on light, each time for the first time. His fingers cover the mouths of all the sopranos, each a princess in an exact position., NR: 133, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: day think place place musician work play flute cave built sea blow light time first time finger cover mouth soprano princess exact posit
TEXT:  If you can find it, the music takes place in a grotto, a great hole in the earth. You must wait outside the mouth hole for hours while the Egyptian boatman howls the password and the sea keeps booming and booming., NR: 134, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: find music take place grotto great hole earth must wait outsid mouth hole hour boatman howl password sea keep boom boom
TEXT:  At that point you will be in a state of terror, moaning, “How can we?” for you will see only the unreliable chain that is meant to drag you in. It is called Waiting on the Edge. At the moment of entry your head will be below the gunwales, your shoulders will rock and struggle as you ship hogsheads of water., NR: 135, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: point state terror moan see unreli chain meant drag wait edg moment entri head gunwal shoulder rock struggl ship hogshead water
TEXT:  “Here?” you will ask, looking around for your camera and shoes and then you will not need to ask for the flutist is playing. This is the music that you waited for in the great concert halls, season after season, and never found., NR: 136, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ask look around camera shoe need ask flutist music great concert hall season season never found
TEXT:  It is called Being Inside. It is close to being dead. Although you had expected pain there will be no pain, only that piper, that midwife with his unforgettable woman’s face. The left side of the flute cannot be seen., NR: 137, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: insid close dead although pain pain piper midwif unforgett woman face left side flute cannot seen
TEXT:  It grows into the wall like something human. It is driven into the wall like a pipe that extends, some say, into the sun. The flutist sucks and blows. He is both a woman and a man, abandoned to that great force and spilling it back out., NR: 138, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wall like someth human driven wall like pipe say sun flutist suck blow woman man abandon great forc back
TEXT:  He is the undefiled, the eternal listener who has cried back into the earth. In the distance other travelers, others like you who came out of simple curiosity, remain for generations. From all sides of the cave you will notice the protruding fingernails of the dead., NR: 139, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: undefil etern listen ha cri back earth distanc travel like came simpl curios remain gener side cave notic fingernail dead
TEXT:  From their coffins as stale as cheap cigars, through the tons of suffocating dirt, they heard and dug down immediately and persistently. They scratched down for centuries in order to enter. At the far right, rising from an underground sea, his toes curled on a black wave, stands the dwarf; his instrument is an extension of his tongue., NR: 140, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: coffin stale cheap cigar ton suffoc dirt dug immedi persist centuri order enter far right rise underground sea toe curl black wave stand dwarf instrument extens tongu
TEXT:  He holds it fast as if it would get away, wet and cold and slippery as it is. He is the other half. The one you hadn’t expected. You will jump up and point at him shouting, “It is you!” but he will not listen., NR: 141, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: hold fast would get away wet cold slipperi half one jump point shout listen
TEXT:  He plays his own song, cursing the wind with his enormous misshapen mouth. And you, having heard, you will never leave. At the moment of entry you were fed— —and then you knew. January 1963., NR: 142, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: play song wind enorm misshapen mouth never leav moment entri fed knew
TEXT: SYLVIA’S DEATH for Sylvia Plath O Sylvia, Sylvia, with a dead box of stones and spoons, with two children, two meteors wandering loose in the tiny playroom, with your mouth into the sheet, into the roofbeam, into the dumb prayer, (Sylvia, Sylvia, where did you go after you wrote me from Devonshire about raising potatoes and keeping bees?) what did you stand by, just how did you lie down into? Thief!— how did you crawl into, crawl down alone into the death I wanted so badly and for so long, the death we said we both outgrew, the one we wore on our skinny breasts, the one we talked of so often each time we downed three extra dry martinis in Boston, the death that talked of analysts and cures, the death that talked like brides with plots, the death we drank to, the motives and then the quiet deed? (In Boston the dying ride in cabs, yes death again, that ride home with our boy., NR: 143, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: death dead box stone spoon two child two meteor wander loos tini playroom mouth sheet dumb prayer wrote devonshir rais potato keep bee stand lie thief crawl crawl alon death badli long death said one wore skinni breast one often time three extra dri boston death analyst cure death like bride plot death drank motif quiet deed boston die ride cab ye death ride home boy
TEXT: ) O Sylvia, I remember the sleepy drummer who beat on our eyes with an old story, how we wanted to let him come like a sadist or a New York fairy to do his job, a necessity, a window in a wall or a crib, and since that time he waited under our heart, our cupboard, and I see now that we store him up year after year, old suicides and I know at the news of your death, a terrible taste for it, like salt., NR: 144, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: rememb sleepi drummer beat eye old stori let come like sadist new york fairi job necess window wall crib sinc time heart cupboard see store year year old suicid know news death terribl tast like salt
TEXT:  (And me, me too. And now, Sylvia, you again with death again, that ride home with our boy.) And I say only with my arms stretched out into that stone place, what is your death but an old belonging, a mole that fell out of one of your poems? (O friend, while the moon’s bad, and the king’s gone, and the queen’s at her wit’s end the bar fly ought to sing!) O tiny mother, you too! O funny duchess! O blonde thing! February 17, 1963., NR: 145, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: death ride home boy say arm stone place death old belong mole fell one poem friend moon bad king gone queen wit end bar fli ought sing tini mother funni duchess blond thing
TEXT: PROTESTANT EASTER eight years old When he was a little boy Jesus was good all the time. No wonder that he grew up to be such a big shot who could forgive people so much. When he died everyone was mean., NR: 146, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: protest easter eight year old wa littl boy wa good time wonder grew big shot could forgiv peopl much everyon wa mean
TEXT:  Later on he rose when no one else was looking. Either he was hiding or else he went up. Maybe he was only hiding? Maybe he could fly? Yesterday I found a purple crocus blowing its way out of the snow., NR: 147, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: later rose one els wa look either wa els went mayb wa mayb could fli yesterday found purpl crocu blow way snow
TEXT:  It was all alone. It was getting its work done. Maybe Jesus was only getting his work done and letting God blow him off the Cross and maybe he was afraid for a minute so he hid under the big stones. He was smart to go to sleep up there even though his mother got so sad and let them put him in a cave., NR: 148, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa alon wa get work done mayb wa get work done god blow cross mayb wa afraid minut big stone wa smart sleep even though mother got sad let put cave
TEXT:  I sat in a tunnel when I was five. That tunnel, my mother said, went straight into the big river and so I never went again. Maybe Jesus knew my tunnel and crawled right through to the river so he could wash all the blood off., NR: 149, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sat tunnel wa five tunnel mother said went straight big river never went mayb knew tunnel right river could wash blood
TEXT:  Maybe he only meant to get clean and then come back again? Don’t tell me that he went up in smoke like Daddy’s cigar! He didn’t blow out like a match! It is special being here at Easter with the Cross they built like a capital T., NR: 150, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: mayb meant get clean come back tell went smoke like daddi cigar blow like match special easter cross built like capit
TEXT:  The ceiling is an upside-down rowboat. I usually count its ribs. Maybe he was drowning? Or maybe we are all upside down? I can see the face of a mouse inside of all that stained-glass window. Well, it could be a mouse! Once I thought the Bunny Rabbit was special and I hunted for eggs., NR: 151, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ceil upsid rowboat usual count rib mayb wa mayb upsid see face mous insid glass window well could mous thought bunni rabbit wa special egg
TEXT:  That’s when I was seven. I’m grownup now. Now it’s really Jesus. I just have to get Him straight. And right now. Who are we anyhow? What do we belong to? Are we a we? I think that he rose but I’m not quite sure and they don’t really say singing their Alleluia in the churchy way., NR: 152, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa seven grownup realli get straight right anyhow belong think rose quit sure realli say sing alleluia churchi way
TEXT:  Jesus was on that Cross. After that they pounded nails into his hands. After that, well, after that, everyone wore hats and then there was a big stone rolled away and then almost everyone— the ones who sit up straight— looked at the ceiling., NR: 153, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa cross nail hand well everyon wore hat wa big stone roll away almost everyon one sit straight ceil
TEXT:  Alleluia they sing. They don’t know. They don’t care if he was hiding or flying. Well, it doesn’t matter how he got there. It matters where he was going. The important thing for me is that I’m wearing white gloves., NR: 154, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: alleluia sing know care wa fli well matter got matter wa go import thing wear white glove
TEXT:  I always sit straight. I keep on looking at the ceiling. And about Jesus, they couldn’t be sure of it, not so sure of it anyhow, so they decided to become Protestants. Those are the people that sing when they aren’t quite sure., NR: 155, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: alway sit straight keep look ceil sure sure anyhow decid becom protest peopl sing quit sure
TEXT:  Spring 1963., NR: 156, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: spring
TEXT: FOR THE YEAR OF THE INSANE a prayer O Mary, fragile mother, hear me, hear me now although I do not know your words. The black rosary with its silver Christ lies unblessed in my hand for I am the unbeliever., NR: 157, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: year insan prayer mari fragil mother hear hear although know word black rosari silver lie unbless hand unbeliev
TEXT:  Each bead is round and hard between my fingers, a small black angel. O Mary, permit me this grace, this crossing over, although I am ugly, submerged in my own past and my own madness. Although there are chairs I lie on the floor., NR: 158, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: bead round hard finger small black angel mari permit grace cross although ugli submerg past mad although chair lie floor
TEXT:  Only my hands are alive, touching beads. Word for word, I stumble. A beginner, I feel your mouth touch mine. I count beads as waves, hammering in upon me. I am ill at their numbers, sick, sick in the summer heat and the window above me is my only listener, my awkward being., NR: 159, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: hand aliv touch bead word word stumbl beginn feel mouth touch mine count bead wave hammer upon ill number sick sick summer heat window listen awkward
TEXT:  She is a large taker, a soother. The giver of breath she murmurs, exhaling her wide lung like an enormous fish. Closer and closer comes the hour of my death as I rearrange my face, grow back, grow undeveloped and straight-haired., NR: 160, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: larg taker soother giver breath murmur wide lung like enorm fish closer closer come hour death rearrang face grow back grow undevelop straight hair
TEXT:  All this is death. In the mind there is a thin alley called death and I move through it as through water. My body is useless. It lies, curled like a dog on the carpet. It has given up. There are no words here except the half-learned, the Hail Mary and the full of grace., NR: 161, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: death mind thin alley death move water bodi useless lie curl like dog carpet ha given word except half learn hail mari full grace
TEXT:  Now I have entered the year without words. I note the queer entrance and the exact voltage. Without words they exist. Without words one may touch bread and be handed bread and make no sound. O Mary, tender physician, come with powders and herbs for I am in the center., NR: 162, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: year without word note queer entranc exact voltag without word exist without word one may touch bread hand bread make sound mari tender physician come powder herb center
TEXT:  It is very small and the air is gray as in a steam house. I am handed wine as a child is handed milk. It is presented in a delicate glass with a round bowl and a thin lip. The wine itself is pitch-colored, musty and secret., NR: 163, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: small air gray steam hous hand wine child hand milk delic glass round bowl thin lip wine pitch color musti secret
TEXT:  The glass rises on its own toward my mouth and I notice this and understand this only because it has happened. I have this fear of coughing but I do not speak, a fear of rain, a fear of the horseman who comes riding into my mouth., NR: 164, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: glass rise toward mouth notic understand ha fear speak fear rain fear horseman come ride mouth
TEXT:  The glass tilts in on its own and I am on fire. I see two thin streaks burn down my chin. I see myself as one would see another. I have been cut in two. O Mary, open your eyelids. I am in the domain of silence, the kingdom of the crazy and the sleeper., NR: 165, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: glass tilt fire see two thin streak burn chin see one would see anoth cut two mari open eyelid domain silenc kingdom crazi sleeper
TEXT:  There is blood here and I have eaten it. O mother of the womb, did I come for blood alone? O little mother, I am in my own mind. I am locked in the wrong house. August 1963., NR: 166, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: blood eaten mother womb come blood alon littl mother mind lock wrong hous august
TEXT: CROSSING THE ATLANTIC We sail out of season into an oyster-gray wind, over a terrible hardness. Where Dickens crossed with mal de mer in twenty weeks or twenty days I cross toward him in five. Wrapped in robes— not like Caesar but like liver with bacon— I rest on the stern burning my mouth with a wind-hot ash, watching my ship bypass the swells as easily as an old woman reads a palm., NR: 167, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: cross atlant sail season oyster gray wind terribl hard dicken cross mal twenti week twenti day cross toward five wrap robe like like liver bacon rest stern burn mouth wind hot ash watch ship bypass swell easili old woman read palm
TEXT:  I think, as I look North, that a field of mules lay down to die. The ship is 27 hours out. I have entered her. She might be a whale, sleeping 2000 and ship’s company, the last 40¢ martini and steel staterooms where night goes on forever., NR: 168, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: think look north field mule lay die ship hour might whale sleep ship compani last steel stateroom night go forev
TEXT:  Being inside them is, I think, the way one would dig into a planet and forget the word light. I have walked cities, miles of mole alleys with carpets. Inside I have been ten girls who speak French. They languish everywhere like bedsheets., NR: 169, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: insid think way one would dig planet forget word light citi mile mole alley carpet insid ten girl speak languish everywher like
TEXT:  Oh my Atlantic of the cracked shores, those blemished gates of Rockport and Boothbay, those harbor smells like the innards of animals! Old childish Queen, where did you go, you bayer at wharfs and Victorian houses? I have read each page of my mother’s voyage., NR: 170, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: atlant crack shore gate harbor smell like anim old childish queen wharf hous read page mother voyag
TEXT:  I have read each page of her mother’s voyage. I have learned their words as they learned Dickens’. I have swallowed these words like bullets. But I have forgotten the last guest—terror. Unlike them, I cannot toss in the cabin as in childbirth., NR: 171, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: read page mother voyag learn word learn dicken word like bullet forgotten last guest terror unlik cannot toss cabin childbirth
TEXT:  Now always leaving me in the West is the wake, a ragged bridal veil, unexplained, seductive, always rushing down the stairs, never detained, never enough. The ship goes on as though nothing else were happening., NR: 172, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: alway leav west wake rag bridal veil unexplain seduct alway rush stair never never enough ship go though noth els happen
TEXT:  Generation after generation, I go her way. She will run East, knot by knot, over an old bloodstream, stripping it clear, each hour ripping it, pounding, pounding, forcing through as through a virgin. Oh she is so quick! This dead street never stops! September 1963., NR: 173, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: gener gener way run east knot knot old strip clear hour rip pound pound forc virgin quick dead street never stop
TEXT: WALKING IN PARIS I come back to your youth, my Nana, as if I might clean off the mad woman you became, withered and constipated, howling into your own earphone. I come, in middle age, to find you at twenty in high hair and long Victorian skirts trudging shanks’ mare fifteen miles a day in Paris because you could not afford a carriage., NR: 174, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: walk come back youth nana might clean mad woman wither howl earphon come middl age find twenti high hair long skirt shank mare fifteen mile day could afford carriag
TEXT:  I have walked sixteen miles today. I have kept up. I read your Paris letters of 1890. Each night I take them to my thin bed and learn them as an actress learns her lines. “Dear homefolks” you wrote, not knowing I would be your last home, not knowing that I’d peel your life back to its start., NR: 175, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sixteen mile today kept read letter night take thin bed learn actress line dear wrote know would last home know peel life back start
TEXT:  What is so real as walking your streets! I too have the sore toe you tend with cotton. In Paris 1890 was yesterday and 1940 never happened— the soiled uniform of the Nazi has been unravelled and reknit and resold., NR: 176, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: real walk street sore toe tend cotton wa yesterday never soil uniform ha unravel reknit
TEXT:  To be occupied or conquered is nothing— to remain is all! Having come this far I will go farther. You are my history (that stealer of children) and I have entered you. I have deserted my husband and my children, the Negro issue, the late news and the hot baths., NR: 177, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: noth remain come far farther histori stealer child desert husband child negro issu late news hot bath
TEXT:  My room in Paris, no more than a cell, is crammed with 58 lbs. of books. They are all that is American and forgotten. I read your letters instead, putting your words into my life. Come, old woman, we will be sisters! We will price the menus in the small cafés, count francs, observe the tower where Marie Antoinette awaited her beheading, kneel by the rose window of Notre Dame, and let cloudy weather bear us home early to huddle by the weak stove in Madame’s kitchen., NR: 178, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: room cell book forgotten read letter instead word life come old woman sister price menu small count franc observ tower kneel rose window dame let cloudi weather bear home earli huddl weak stove madam kitchen
TEXT:  We will set out tomorrow in stout shoes to buy a fur muff for our blue fingers. I take your arms boldly, each day a new excursion. Come, my sister, we are two virgins, our lives once more perfected and unused., NR: 179, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: set tomorrow stout shoe buy fur muff blue finger take arm boldli day new excurs come sister two virgin life perfect unus
TEXT:  October 1963., NR: 180, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: MENSTRUATION AT FORTY I was thinking of a son. The womb is not a clock nor a bell tolling, but in the eleventh month of its life I feel the November of the body as well as of the calendar. In two days it will be my birthday and as always the earth is done with its harvest., NR: 181, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: menstruat forti wa think son womb clock bell toll eleventh month life feel bodi well calendar two day birthday alway earth done harvest
TEXT:  This time I hunt for death, the night I lean toward, the night I want. Well then— speak of it! It was in the womb all along. I was thinking of a son … You! The never acquired, the never seeded or unfastened, you of the genitals I feared, the stalk and the puppy’s breath., NR: 182, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: time hunt death night lean toward night want well speak wa womb along wa think son never acquir never seed unfasten genit fear stalk puppi breath
TEXT:  Will I give you my eyes or his? Will you be the David or the Susan? (Those two names I picked and listened for.) Can you be the man your fathers are— the leg muscles from Michelangelo, hands from Yugoslavia, somewhere the peasant, Slavic and determined, somewhere the survivor, bulging with life— and could it still be possible, all this with Susan’s eyes? All this without you— two days gone in blood., NR: 183, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: give eye two name pick man father leg muscl hand somewher peasant determin somewher survivor life could still possibl eye without two day gone blood
TEXT:  I myself will die without baptism, a third daughter they didn’t bother. My death will come on my name day. What’s wrong with the name day? It’s only an angel of the sun. Woman, weaving a web over your own, a thin and tangled poison., NR: 184, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: die without baptism third daughter bother death come name day wrong name day angel sun woman weav web thin poison
TEXT:  Scorpio, bad spider— die! My death from the wrists, two name tags, blood worn like a corsage to bloom one on the left and one on the right— It’s a warm room, the place of the blood. Leave the door open on its hinges! Two days for your death and two days until mine., NR: 185, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: bad spider die death wrist two name tag blood worn like corsag bloom one left one right warm room place blood leav door open hing two day death two day mine
TEXT:  Love! That red disease— year after year, David, you would make me wild! David! Susan! David! David! full and disheveled, hissing into the night, never growing old, waiting always for you on the porch … year after year, my carrot, my cabbage, I would have possessed you before all women, calling your name, calling you mine., NR: 186, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: love red diseas year year would make wild full dishevel hiss night never grow old wait alway porch year year carrot cabbag would possess woman call name call mine
TEXT:  November 7, 1963., NR: 187, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: CHRISTMAS EVE Oh sharp diamond, my mother! I could not count the cost of all your faces, your moods— that present that I lost. Sweet girl, my deathbed, my jewel-fingered lady, your portrait flickered all night by the bulbs of the tree., NR: 188, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: eve sharp diamond mother could count cost face mood present lost sweet girl deathb jewel finger ladi portrait night bulb tree
TEXT:  Your face as calm as the moon over a mannered sea, presided at the family reunion, the twelve grandchildren you used to wear on your wrist, a three-months-old baby, a fat check you never wrote, the red-haired toddler who danced the twist, your aging daughters, each one a wife, each one talking to the family cook, each one avoiding your portrait, each one aping your life., NR: 189, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: face calm moon manner sea famili reunion twelv grandchild use wear wrist three month old babi fat check never wrote red hair toddler twist age daughter one wife one talk famili cook one portrait one ape life
TEXT:  Later, after the party, after the house went to bed, I sat up drinking the Christmas brandy, watching your picture, letting the tree move in and out of focus. The bulbs vibrated. They were a halo over your forehead., NR: 190, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: later parti hous went bed sat drink brandi watch pictur tree move focu bulb halo forehead
TEXT:  Then they were a beehive, blue, yellow, green, red; each with its own juice, each hot and alive stinging your face. But you did not move. I continued to watch, forcing myself, waiting, inexhaustible, thirty-five., NR: 191, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: beehiv blue yellow green red juic hot aliv sting face move continu watch forc wait inexhaust thirti five
TEXT:  I wanted your eyes, like the shadows of two small birds, to change. But they did not age. The smile that gathered me in, all wit, all charm, was invincible. Hour after hour I looked at your face but I could not pull the roots out of it., NR: 192, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: eye like shadow two small bird chang age smile wit charm wa invinc hour hour face could pull root
TEXT:  Then I watched how the sun hit your red sweater, your withered neck, your badly painted flesh-pink skin. You who led me by the nose, I saw you as you were. Then I thought of your body as one thinks of murder … Then I said Mary— Mary, Mary, forgive me and then I touched a present for the child, the last I bred before your death; and then I touched my breast and then I touched the floor and then my breast again as if, somehow, it were one of yours., NR: 193, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: watch sun hit red sweater wither neck badli paint flesh pink skin led nose saw thought bodi one think murder said mari mari mari forgiv touch present child last bred death touch breast touch floor breast somehow one
TEXT:  December 24, 1963., NR: 194, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: KE 6–8018 Black lady, two eyes, low as tobacco, who inked you in? The shoemaker could not do it, nor the sculptor nor the cubist. Trunk is what you are, with two washbowls. You are a sweetener, a drawer of blood—that’s all, a hot voice, an imminence and then a death., NR: 195, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: black ladi two eye low tobacco shoemak could sculptor cubist trunk two washbowl sweeten drawer blood hot voic immin death
TEXT:  Why death? Death’s in the goodbye. My love, when you leave in which crevice will you hide? What signs will remain? Black slime will not come of it, nor backwash from the traveler. You will rest Like a drowned bat upon my shoulder., NR: 196, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: death death love leav crevic hide sign remain black slime come backwash travel rest like bat upon shoulder
TEXT:  In one hand I will have to hold that silence. There will be no track anymore. There will be only that peculiar waiting. There will be nothing to pick up. There will be nothing. There will have been a house— a house that I knew, the center of it, a tiny heart, synthetic though it was making that thin buzz-buzz like a sly beetle., NR: 197, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: one hand hold silenc track peculiar wait noth pick noth hous hous knew center tini heart synthet though wa make thin buzz buzz like sli beetl
TEXT:  Black lady, what will I do without your two flowers? I have inhabited you, number by number. I have pushed you in and out like a needle. Funny digits, I have danced upon your trunk and I have knelt on your torso., NR: 198, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: black ladi without two flower inhabit number number like needl funni digit upon trunk knelt torso
TEXT:  With my words I have perjured my soul. Take note—there will be an absence. It will be a cancer, spreading like a white dog who doubles back, not knowing his name. Although I will inherit darkness I will keep dialing left to right., NR: 199, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: word perjur soul take note absenc cancer spread like white dog doubl back know name although inherit dark keep dial left right
TEXT:  I will struggle like a surgeon. I will call quickly for the glare of the moon. I will even dial milk. I will hold the thread that was fished through the ceiling that leads to the roof, the pole, the grass, that ends in the sea., NR: 200, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: struggl like surgeon call quickli glare moon even dial milk hold thread wa fish ceil lead roof pole grass end sea
TEXT:  I will not wait at the rail looking upon death, that single stone. I will call for the boy-child I never had. I will call like the Jew at the gate. I will dial the wound over and over and you will not yield and there will be nothing, black lady, nothing, although I will wait, unleashed and unheard., NR: 201, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wait rail look upon death singl stone call boy child never call like gate dial wound yield noth black ladi noth although wait unleash unheard
TEXT:  January 3, 1964., NR: 202, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: WANTING TO DIE Since you ask, most days I cannot remember. I walk in my clothing, unmarked by that voyage. Then the almost unnameable lust returns. Even then I have nothing against life. I know well the grass blades you mention, the furniture you have placed under the sun., NR: 203, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: want die sinc ask day cannot rememb walk cloth unmark voyag almost unnam lust return even noth life know well grass blade mention furnitur sun
TEXT:  But suicides have a special language. Like carpenters they want to know which tools. They never ask why build. Twice I have so simply declared myself, have possessed the enemy, eaten the enemy, have taken on his craft, his magic., NR: 204, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: suicid special languag like carpent want know tool never ask build twice simpli declar possess enemi eaten enemi taken craft magic
TEXT:  In this way, heavy and thoughtful, warmer than oil or water, I have rested, drooling at the mouth-hole. I did not think of my body at needle point. Even the cornea and the leftover urine were gone. Suicides have already betrayed the body., NR: 205, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: way heavi thought warmer oil water mouth hole think bodi needl point even cornea leftov urin gone suicid alreadi bodi
TEXT:  Still-born, they don’t always die, but dazzled, they can’t forget a drug so sweet that even children would look on and smile. To thrust all that life under your tongue!— that, all by itself, becomes a passion., NR: 206, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: still born alway die forget drug sweet even child would look smile thrust life tongu becom passion
TEXT:  Death’s a sad bone; bruised, you’d say, and yet she waits for me, year after year, to so delicately undo an old wound, to empty my breath from its bad prison. Balanced there, suicides sometimes meet, raging at the fruit, a pumped-up moon, leaving the bread they mistook for a kiss, leaving the page of the book carelessly open, something unsaid, the phone off the hook and the love, whatever it was, an infection., NR: 207, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: death sad bone say yet wait year year delic undo old wound empti breath bad prison balanc suicid sometim meet rage fruit moon leav bread mistook kiss leav page book carelessli open someth unsaid phone hook love whatev wa infect
TEXT:  February 3, 1964., NR: 208, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: THE WEDDING NIGHT There was this time in Boston before spring was ready—a short celebration— and then it was over. I walked down Marlborough Street the day you left me under branches as tedious as leather, under branches as stiff as drivers’ gloves., NR: 209, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wed night wa time boston spring wa readi short celebr wa street day left branch tediou leather branch stiff driver glove
TEXT:  I said, (but only because you were gone) “Magnolia blossoms have rather a southern sound, so unlike Boston anyhow,” and whatever it was that happened, all that pink, and for so short a time, was unbelievable, was pinned on., NR: 210, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: said gone magnolia blossom rather southern sound unlik boston anyhow whatev wa pink short time wa unbeliev wa pin
TEXT:  The magnolias had sat once, each in a pink dress, looking, of course, at the ceiling. For weeks the buds had been as sure-bodied as the twelve-year-old flower girl I was at Aunt Edna’s wedding. Will they bend, I had asked, as I walked under them toward you, bend two to a branch, cheek, forehead, shoulder to the floor? I could see that none were clumsy., NR: 211, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: magnolia sat pink dress look cours ceil week bud sure bodi twelv year old flower girl wa aunt wed bend toward bend two branch cheek forehead shoulder floor could see none clumsi
TEXT:  I could see that each was tight and firm. Not one of them had trickled blood— waiting as polished as gull beaks, as closed as all that. I stood under them for nights, hesitating, and then drove away in my car., NR: 212, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: could see wa tight firm one blood wait polish gull beak close stood night hesit drove away car
TEXT:  Yet one night in the April night someone (someone!) kicked each bud open— to disprove, to mock, to puncture! The next day they were all hot-colored, moist, not flawed in fact. Then they no longer huddled., NR: 213, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: yet one night night someon someon bud open disprov mock punctur next day hot color moist flaw fact longer
TEXT:  They forgot how to hide. Tense as they had been, they were flags, gaudy, chafing in the wind. There was such abandonment in all that! Such entertainment in their flaring up. After that, well— like faces in a parade, I could not tell the difference between losing you and losing them., NR: 214, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: forgot hide tens flag gaudi wind wa abandon entertain flare well like face parad could tell differ lose lose
TEXT:  They dropped separately after the celebration, handpicked, one after the other like artichoke leaves. After that I walked to my car awkwardly over the painful bare remains on the brick sidewalk, knowing that someone had, in one night, passed roughly through, and before it was time., NR: 215, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: separ celebr one like artichok leaf car awkwardli pain bare remain brick sidewalk know someon one night roughli wa time
TEXT:  April 27–May 1, 1964., NR: 216, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: may
TEXT: LITTLE GIRL, MY STRING BEAN, MY LOVELY WOMAN My daughter, at eleven (almost twelve), is like a garden. Oh, darling! Born in that sweet birthday suit and having owned it and known it for so long, now you must watch high noon enter— noon, that ghost hour., NR: 217, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: littl girl string bean love woman daughter eleven almost twelv like garden darl born sweet birthday suit known long must watch high noon enter noon ghost hour
TEXT:  Oh, funny little girl—this one under a blueberry sky, this one! How can I say that I’ve known just what you know and just where you are? It’s not a strange place, this odd home where your face sits in my hand so full of distance, so full of its immediate fever., NR: 218, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: funni littl girl one blueberri sky one say known know strang place odd home face hand full distanc full immedi fever
TEXT:  The summer has seized you, as when, last month in Amalfi, I saw lemons as large as your desk-side globe— that miniature map of the world— and I could mention, too, the market stalls of mushrooms and garlic buds all engorged., NR: 219, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: summer ha last month saw lemon larg desk side globe miniatur map world could mention market stall mushroom garlic bud
TEXT:  Or I think even of the orchard next door, where the berries are done and the apples are beginning to swell. And once, with our first backyard, I remember I planted an acre of yellow beans we couldn’t eat., NR: 220, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: think even orchard next door berri done appl begin swell first rememb acr yellow bean eat
TEXT:  Oh, little girl, my stringbean, how do you grow? You grow this way. You are too many to eat. I hear as in a dream the conversation of the old wives speaking of womanhood. I remember that I heard nothing myself., NR: 221, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: littl girl grow grow way mani eat hear dream convers old wife speak womanhood rememb noth
TEXT:  I was alone. I waited like a target. Let high noon enter— the hour of the ghosts. Once the Romans believed that noon was the ghost hour, and I can believe it, too, under that startling sun, and someday they will come to you, someday, men bare to the waist, young Romans at noon where they belong, with ladders and hammers while no one sleeps., NR: 222, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa alon like target let high noon enter hour ghost noon wa ghost hour believ startl sun someday come someday men bare waist young noon belong ladder hammer one sleep
TEXT:  But before they enter I will have said, Your bones are lovely, and before their strange hands there was always this hand that formed. Oh, darling, let your body in, let it tie you in, in comfort. What I want to say, Linda, is that women are born twice., NR: 223, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: enter said bone love strang hand wa alway hand form darl let bodi let tie comfort want say woman born twice
TEXT:  If I could have watched you grow as a magical mother might, if I could have seen through my magical transparent belly, there would have been such ripening within: your embryo, the seed taking on its own, life clapping the bedpost, bones from the pond, thumbs and two mysterious eyes, the awfully human head, the heart jumping like a puppy, the important lungs, the becoming— while it becomes! as it does now, a world of its own, a delicate place., NR: 224, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: could watch grow magic mother might could seen magic transpar belli would ripen within embryo seed take life clap bedpost bone pond thumb two mysteri eye aw human head heart like puppi import lung becom becom doe world delic place
TEXT:  I say hello to such shakes and knockings and high jinks, such music, such sprouts, such dancing-mad-bears of music, such necessary sugar, such goings-on! Oh, little girl, my stringbean, how do you grow? You grow this way., NR: 225, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: say hello shake knock high jink music sprout danc mad bear music necessari sugar go littl girl grow grow way
TEXT:  You are too many to eat. What I want to say, Linda, is that there is nothing in your body that lies. All that is new is telling the truth. I’m here, that somebody else, an old tree in the background. Darling, stand still at your door, sure of yourself, a white stone, a good stone— as exceptional as laughter you will strike fire, that new thing! July 14, 1964., NR: 226, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: mani eat want say noth bodi lie new tell truth somebodi els old tree background darl stand still door sure white stone good stone except laughter strike fire new thing
TEXT: A LITTLE UNCOMPLICATED HYMN for Joy is what I wanted to write. There was such a song! A song for your kneebones, a song for your ribs, those delicate trees that bury your heart; a song for your bookshelf where twenty hand-blown ducks sit in a Venetian row; a song for your dress-up high heels, your fire-red skate board, your twenty grubby fingers, the pink knitting that you start and never quite finish; your poster-paint pictures, all angels making a face, a song for your laughter that keeps wiggling a spoon in my sleep., NR: 227, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: littl uncompl hymn joy write wa song song song rib delic tree buri heart song bookshelf twenti hand blown duck sit row song dress high heel fire red skate board twenti grubbi finger pink knit start never quit finish poster paint pictur angel make face song laughter keep spoon sleep
TEXT:  Even a song for your night as during last summer’s heat wave where your fever stuck at 104 for two weeks, where you slept, head on the window sill, lips as dry as old erasers, your thirst shimmering and heavy as I spooned water in, your eyes shut on the thumping June bugs, the lips moving, mumbling, sending letters to the stars., NR: 228, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: even song night last summer heat wave fever stuck two week slept head window sill lip dri old eras thirst shimmer heavi water eye shut thump june bug lip move mumbl send letter star
TEXT:  Dreaming, dreaming, your body a boat, rocked by your life and my death. Your fists wound like a ball, little fetus, little snail, carrying a rage, a leftover rage I cannot undo. Even a song for your flight where you fell from the neighbor’s tree hut, where you thought you were walking onto solid blue air, you thought, why not? and then, you simply left the boards behind and stepped out into the dust., NR: 229, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: bodi boat life death fist wound like ball littl fetu littl snail carri rage leftov rage cannot undo even song flight fell neighbor tree hut thought walk onto solid blue air thought simpli left board behind step dust
TEXT:  O little Icarus, you chewed on a cloud, you bit the sun and came tumbling down, head first, not into the sea, but hard on the hard packed gravel. You fell on your eye. You fell on your chin. What a shiner! What a faint you had and then crawled home, a knocked-out humpty dumpty in my arms., NR: 230, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: littl cloud bit sun came tumbl head first sea hard hard gravel fell eye fell chin shiner faint home humpti arm
TEXT:  O humpty-dumpty girl, I named you Joy. That’s someone’s song all by itself. In the naming of you I named all things you are … except the ditch where I left you once, like an old root that wouldn’t take hold, that ditch where I left you while I sailed off in madness over the buildings and under my umbrella, sailed off for three years so that the first candle and the second candle and the third candle burned down alone on your birthday cake., NR: 231, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: humpti girl joy someon song name thing except ditch left like old root take hold ditch left sail mad build umbrella sail three year first candl second candl third candl burn alon birthday cake
TEXT:  That ditch I want so much to forget and that you try each day to forget. Even here in your school portrait where you repeat third grade, caught in the need not to grow— that little prison— even here you keep up the barrier with a smile that dies afraid as it hides your crooked front tooth., NR: 232, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ditch want much forget tri day forget even school portrait repeat third grade caught need grow littl prison even keep barrier smile afraid hide crook front tooth
TEXT:  Joy, I call you and yet your eyes just here with their shades half-drawn over the gunsights, over your gigantic knowledge, over the little blue fish who dart back and forth, over different streets, the strange rooms, other people’s chairs, other people’s food, ask, “Why was I shut in the cellar?” And I’ve got words, words that dog my heels, words for sale you might say, and multiplication cards and cursive writing that you ignore to teach my fingers the cat’s cradle and the witch’s broom., NR: 233, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: joy call yet eye shade half drawn gigant knowledg littl blue fish dart back forth differ street strang room peopl chair peopl food ask wa shut cellar got word word dog heel word sale might say multipl card cursiv write ignor teach finger cat cradl witch broom
TEXT:  Yes! I have instructions before dinner and hugs after dinner and still those eyes— away, away, asking for hymns … without guilt. And I can only say a little uncomplicated hymn is what I wanted to write and yet I find only your name., NR: 234, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ye instruct dinner hug dinner still eye away away hymn without guilt say littl uncompl hymn write yet find name
TEXT:  There was such a song, but it’s bruised. It’s not mine. You will jump to it someday as you will jump out of the pitch of this house. It will be a holiday, a parade, a fiesta! Then you’ll fly. You’ll really fly., NR: 235, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: wa song mine jump someday jump pitch hous holiday parad fiesta fli realli fli
TEXT:  After that you’ll, quite simply, quite calmly make your own stones, your own floor plan, your own sound. I wanted to write such a poem with such musics, such guitars going; I tried at the teeth of sound to draw up such legions of noise; I tried at the breakwater to catch the star off each ship; and at the closing of hands I looked for their houses and silences., NR: 236, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: quit simpli quit calmli make stone floor plan sound write poem music guitar go tri teeth sound draw legion nois tri breakwat catch star ship hand hous silenc
TEXT:  I found just one. you were mine and I lent you out. I look for uncomplicated hymns but love has none. March 1965., NR: 237, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: found one mine lent look uncompl hymn love ha none march
TEXT: YOUR FACE ON THE DOG’S NECK It is early afternoon. You sit on the grass with your rough face on the dog’s neck. Right now you are both as still as a snapshot. That infectious dog ought to let a fly bother her, ought to run out in an immense field, chasing rabbits and skunks, mauling the cats, licking insects off her rump, and stop using you up., NR: 238, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: face dog neck earli afternoon sit grass rough face dog neck right still snapshot infecti dog ought let fli bother ought run immens field chase rabbit skunk maul cat lick insect rump stop
TEXT:  My darling, why do you lean on her so? I would touch you, that pulse brooding under your Madras shirt, each shoulder the most well built house, the arms, thin birches that do not escape the breeze, the white teeth that have known me, that wait at the bottom of the brook and the tongue, my little fish!… but you are stopped in time., NR: 239, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: darl lean would touch puls brood shirt shoulder well built hous arm thin birch escap breez white teeth known wait bottom brook tongu littl fish stop time
TEXT:  So I will speak of your eyes although they are closed. Tell me, where is each stubborn-colored iris? Where are the quick pupils that make the floor tilt under me? I see only the lids, as tough as riding boots., NR: 240, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: speak eye although close tell stubborn color iri quick pupil make floor tilt see lid tough ride boot
TEXT:  Why have your eyes gone into their own room? Goodnight they are saying from their little leathery doors. Or shall I sing of eyes that have been ruined with mercy and lust and once with your own death when you lay bubbling like a caught fish, sucking on the manufactured oxygen? Or shall I sing of eyes that are resting so near the hair of that hateful animal? Love twists me, a Spanish flute plays in my blood, and yet I can see only your little sleep, an empty place., NR: 241, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: eye gone room say littl leatheri door shall sing eye ruin merci lust death lay bubbl like caught fish suck oxygen shall sing eye rest near hair hate anim love twist flute play blood yet see littl sleep empti place
TEXT:  But when your eyes open against the wool stink of her thick hair, against the faintly sickening neck of that dog, whom I envy like a thief, what will I ask? Will I speak up saying, there is a hurried song, a certain seizure from which I gasp? Or will your eyes lie in wait, little field mice nestling on their paws? Perhaps they will say nothing, perhaps they will be dark and leaden, having played their own game somewhere else, somewhere far off., NR: 242, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: eye open wool stink thick hair faintli sicken neck dog envi like thief ask speak say hurri song certain seizur gasp eye lie wait littl field mous nestl paw perhap say noth perhap dark leaden game somewher els somewher far
TEXT:  Oh, I have learned them and know that when they open and glance at me I will turn like a little dancer and then, quite simply, and all by myself, I will fall, bound to some mother/father, bound to your sight, bound for nowhere and everywhere., NR: 243, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: learn know open glanc turn like littl dancer quit simpli fall bound mother father bound sight bound nowher everywher
TEXT:  Or, perhaps, my darling, because it is early afternoon, I will forget that my voice is full of good people, forget how my legs could sprawl on the terrace, forget all that the birds might witness, the torn dress, the shoes lost in the arbor, while the neighbor’s lawnmower bites and spits out some new little rows of innocent grass., NR: 244, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: perhap darl earli afternoon forget voic full good peopl forget leg could sprawl terrac forget bird might wit torn dress shoe lost arbor neighbor bite spit new littl row innoc grass
TEXT:  Certainly, I need not speak of it at all. I will crouch down and put my cheek near you, accepting this spayed and flatulent bitch you hold, letting my face rest in an assembled tenderness on the old dog’s neck., NR: 245, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: certainli need speak crouch put cheek near flatul bitch hold face rest tender old dog neck
TEXT:  May 19, 1965., NR: 246, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: may
TEXT: SELF IN 1958 What is reality? I am a plaster doll; I pose with eyes that cut open without landfall or nightfall upon some shellacked and grinning person, eyes that open, blue, steel, and close. Am I approximately an I., NR: 247, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: self realiti plaster doll pose eye cut open without landfal nightfal upon grin person eye open blue steel close approxim
TEXT:  Magnin transplant? I have hair, black angel, black-angel-stuffing to comb, nylon legs, luminous arms and some advertised clothes. I live in a doll’s house with four chairs, a counterfeit table, a flat roof and a big front door., NR: 248, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: transplant hair black angel black angel stuf comb nylon leg lumin arm cloth live doll hous four chair counterfeit tabl flat roof big front door
TEXT:  Many have come to such a small crossroad. There is an iron bed, (Life enlarges, life takes aim) a cardboard floor, windows that flash open on someone’s city, and little more. Someone plays with me, plants me in the all-electric kitchen, Is this what Mrs., NR: 249, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: mani come small crossroad iron bed life life take aim cardboard floor window flash open someon citi littl someon play plant electr kitchen
TEXT:  Rombauer said? Someone pretends with me— I am walled in solid by their noise— or puts me upon their straight bed. They think I am me! Their warmth? Their warmth is not a friend! They pry my mouth for their cups of gin and their stale bread., NR: 250, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: said someon pretend wall solid nois put upon straight bed think warmth warmth friend pri mouth cup gin stale bread
TEXT:  What is reality to this synthetic doll who should smile, who should shift gears, should spring the doors open in a wholesome disorder, and have no evidence of ruin or fears? But I would cry, rooted into the wall that was once my mother, if I could remember how and if I had the tears., NR: 251, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: realiti synthet doll smile shift gear spring door open wholesom disord evid ruin fear would cri root wall wa mother could rememb tear
TEXT:  June 1958–June 1965., NR: 252, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: june june
TEXT: SUICIDE NOTE You speak to me of narcissism but I reply that it is a matter of my life … Artaud At this time let me somehow bequeath all the leftovers to my daughters and their daughters … Anonymous Better, despite the worms talking to the mare’s hoof in the field; better, despite the season of young girls dropping their blood; better somehow to drop myself quickly into an old room., NR: 253, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: suicid note speak narciss repli matter life time let somehow bequeath leftov daughter daughter anonym better despit worm talk mare hoof field better despit season young girl drop blood better somehow drop quickli old room
TEXT:  Better (someone said) not to be born and far better not to be born twice at thirteen where the boardinghouse, each year a bedroom, caught fire. Dear friend, I will have to sink with hundreds of others on a dumbwaiter into hell., NR: 254, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: better someon said born far better born twice thirteen boardinghous year bedroom caught fire dear friend sink hundr hell
TEXT:  I will be a light thing. I will enter death like someone’s lost optical lens. Life is half enlarged. The fish and owls are fierce today. Life tilts backward and forward. Even the wasps cannot find my eyes., NR: 255, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: light thing enter death like someon lost optic len life half enlarg fish owl fierc today life tilt backward forward even wasp cannot find eye
TEXT:  Yes, eyes that were immediate once. Eyes that have been truly awake, eyes that told the whole story— poor dumb animals. Eyes that were pierced, little nail heads, light blue gunshots. And once with a mouth like a cup, clay colored or blood colored, open like the breakwater for the lost ocean and open like the noose for the first head., NR: 256, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ye eye immedi eye truli awak eye told whole stori poor dumb anim eye pierc littl nail head light blue gunshot mouth like cup clay color blood color open like breakwat lost ocean open like noos first head
TEXT:  Once upon a time my hunger was for Jesus. O my hunger! My hunger! Before he grew old he rode calmly into Jerusalem in search of death. This time I certainly do not ask for understanding and yet I hope everyone else will turn their heads when an unrehearsed fish jumps on the surface of Echo Lake; when moonlight, its bass note turned up loud, hurts some building in Boston, when the truly beautiful lie together., NR: 257, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: upon time hunger wa hunger hunger grew old rode calmli search death time certainli ask understand yet hope everyon els turn head unrehears fish jump surfac echo lake moonlight bass note turn loud hurt build boston truli beauti lie togeth
TEXT:  I think of this, surely, and would think of it far longer if I were not … if I were not at that old fire. I could admit that I am only a coward crying me me me and not mention the little gnats, the moths, forced by circumstance to suck on the electric bulb., NR: 258, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: think sure would think far longer old fire could admit coward cri mention littl gnat moth forc circumst suck electr bulb
TEXT:  But surely you know that everyone has a death, his own death, waiting for him. So I will go now without old age or disease, wildly but accurately, knowing my best route, carried by that toy donkey I rode all these years, never asking, “Where are we going?” We were riding (if I’d only known) to this., NR: 259, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sure know everyon ha death death wait without old age diseas wildli accur know best rout carri toy donkey rode year never go ride known
TEXT:  Dear friend, please do not think that I visualize guitars playing or my father arching his bone. I do not even expect my mother’s mouth. I know that I have died before— once in November, once in June., NR: 260, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: dear friend pleas think visual guitar father arch bone even expect mother mouth know june
TEXT:  How strange to choose June again, so concrete with its green breasts and bellies. Of course guitars will not play! The snakes will certainly not notice. New York City will not mind. At night the bats will beat on the trees, knowing it all, seeing what they sensed all day., NR: 261, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: strang choos june concret green breast belli cours guitar play snake certainli notic new york citi mind night bat beat tree know see sens day
TEXT:  June 1965., NR: 262, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: june
TEXT: IN THE BEACH HOUSE The doors open and the heat undoes itself, everyone undoes himself, everyone walks naked. Two of them walk on the table. They are not afraid of God’s displeasure. They will have no truck with the angel who hoots from the fog horn and throws the ocean into the rocks outside., NR: 263, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: beach hous door open heat everyon everyon walk nake two walk tabl afraid god displeasur truck angel hoot fog horn throw ocean rock outsid
TEXT:  One of them covers the bedstead. One of them winds round the bedpost and both of them beat on the floor. My little cot listens in all night long— even with the ocean turned up high, even with every door boarded up, they are allowed the lifting of the object, the placing themselves upon the swing., NR: 264, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: one cover bedstead one wind round bedpost beat floor littl cot night long even ocean turn high even everi door lift object upon swing
TEXT:  Inside my prison of pine and bedspring, over my window sill, under my knob, it is plain that they are at the royal strapping. Have mercy, little pillow, stay mute and uncaring, hear not one word of disaster! Stay close, little sour feather, little fellow full of salt., NR: 265, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: insid prison pine bedspr window sill knob plain royal strap merci littl pillow stay mute uncar hear one word disast stay close littl sour feather littl fellow full salt
TEXT:  My loves are oiling their bones and then delivering them with unspeakable sounds that carry them this way and that while summer is hurrying its way in and out, over and over, in their room. July 15, 1965., NR: 266, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: love bone unspeak sound carri way summer way room
TEXT: CRIPPLES AND OTHER STORIES My doctor, the comedian I called you every time and made you laugh yourself when I wrote this silly rhyme … Each time I give lectures or gather in the grants you send me off to boarding school in training pants., NR: 267, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: crippl stori doctor comedian everi time made laugh wrote silli rhyme time give lectur gather grant send board school train pant
TEXT:  God damn it, father-doctor. I’m really thirty-six. I see dead rats in the toilet. I’m one of the lunatics. Disgusted, mother put me on the potty. She was good at this. My father was fat on scotch. It leaked from every orifice., NR: 268, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: god damn father doctor realli thirti six see dead rat toilet one lunat disgust mother put potti wa good father wa fat scotch everi orific
TEXT:  Oh the enemas of childhood, reeking of outhouses and shame! Yet you rock me in your arms and whisper my nickname. Or else you hold my hand and teach me love too late. And that’s the hand of the arm they tried to amputate., NR: 269, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: enema childhood outhous shame yet rock arm whisper nicknam els hold hand teach love late hand arm tri amput
TEXT:  Though I was almost seven I was an awful brat. I put it in the Easy Wringer. It came out nice and flat. I was an instant cripple from my finger to my shoulder. The laundress wept and swooned. My mother had to hold her., NR: 270, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: though wa almost seven wa aw brat put easi wringer came nice flat wa instant crippl finger shoulder wept swoon mother hold
TEXT:  I knew I was a cripple. Of course, I’d known it from the start. My father took the crowbar and broke that wringer’s heart. The surgeons shook their heads. They really didn’t know— Would the cripple inside of me be a cripple that would show? My father was a perfect man, clean and rich and fat., NR: 271, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: knew wa crippl cours known start father took crowbar broke wringer heart surgeon shook head realli know would crippl insid crippl would show father wa perfect man clean rich fat
TEXT:  My mother was a brilliant thing. She was good at that. You hold me in your arms. How strange that you’re so tender! Child-woman that I am, you think that you can mend her. As for the arm, unfortunately it grew., NR: 272, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: mother wa brilliant thing wa good hold arm strang tender child woman think mend arm unfortun grew
TEXT:  Though mother said a withered arm would put me in Who’s Who. For years she described it. She sang it like a hymn. By then she loved the shrunken thing, my little withered limb. My father’s cells clicked each night, intent on making money., NR: 273, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: though mother said wither arm would put year sang like hymn shrunken thing littl wither limb father cell night intent make money
TEXT:  And as for my cells, they brooded, little queens, on honey. On boys too, as a matter of fact, and cigarettes and cars. Mother frowned at my wasted life. My father smoked cigars. My cheeks blossomed with maggots., NR: 274, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: cell littl queen honey boy matter fact cigarett car mother wast life father smoke cigar cheek blossom maggot
TEXT:  I picked at them like pearls. I covered them with pancake. I wound my hair in curls. My father didn’t know me but you kiss me in my fever. My mother knew me twice and then I had to leave her. But those are just two stories and I have more to tell from the outhouse, the greenhouse where you draw me out of hell., NR: 275, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: pick like pearl cover pancak wound hair curl father know kiss fever mother knew twice leav two stori tell outhous greenhous draw hell
TEXT:  Father, I’m thirty-six, yet I lie here in your crib. I’m getting born again, Adam, as you prod me with your rib. October 1965., NR: 276, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: father thirti six yet lie crib get born prod rib
TEXT: PAIN FOR A DAUGHTER Blind with love, my daughter has cried nightly for horses, those long-necked marchers and churners that she has mastered, any and all, reigning them in like a circus hand— the excitable muscles and the ripe neck; tending this summer, a pony and a foal., NR: 277, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: pain daughter blind love daughter ha cri nightli hors long neck marcher ha like circu hand excit muscl ripe neck tend summer poni foal
TEXT:  She who is too squeamish to pull a thorn from the dog’s paw, watched her pony blossom with distemper, the underside of the jaw swelling like an enormous grape. Gritting her teeth with love, she drained the boil and scoured it with hydrogen peroxide until pus ran like milk on the barn floor., NR: 278, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: squeamish pull thorn dog paw watch poni blossom distemp undersid jaw swell like enorm grape teeth love drain boil scour hydrogen peroxid pu ran like milk barn floor
TEXT:  Blind with loss all winter, in dungarees, a ski jacket and a hard hat, she visits the neighbors’ stable, our acreage not zoned for barns; they who own the flaming horses and the swan-whipped thoroughbred that she tugs at and cajoles, thinking it will burn like a furnace under her small-hipped English seat., NR: 279, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: blind loss winter dungare ski jacket hard hat visit neighbor stabl acreag zone barn flame hors swan whip thoroughbr tug think burn like furnac small hip seat
TEXT:  Blind with pain she limps home. The thoroughbred has stood on her foot. He rested there like a building. He grew into her foot until they were one. The marks of the horseshoe printed into her flesh, the tips of her toes ripped off like pieces of leather, three toenails swirled like shells and left to float in blood in her riding boot., NR: 280, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: blind pain limp home thoroughbr ha stood foot like build grew foot one mark horsesho print flesh tip toe like piec leather three toenail like shell left float blood ride boot
TEXT:  Blind with fear, she sits on the toilet, her foot balanced over the washbasin, her father, hydrogen peroxide in hand, performing the rites of the cleansing. She bites on a towel, sucked in breath, sucked in and arched against the pain, her eyes glancing off me where I stand at the door, eyes locked on the ceiling, eyes of a stranger, and then she cries … Oh my God, help me! Where a child would have cried Mama! Where a child would have believed Mama! she bit the towel and called on God and I saw her life stretch out … I saw her torn in childbirth, and I saw her, at that moment, in her own death and I knew that she knew., NR: 281, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: blind fear toilet foot balanc washbasin father hydrogen peroxid hand rite cleans bite towel breath arch pain eye glanc stand door eye lock ceil eye stranger cri god help child would cri child would bit towel god saw life stretch saw torn childbirth saw moment death knew knew
TEXT:  November 1965., NR: 282, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: 
TEXT: THE ADDICT Sleepmonger, deathmonger, with capsules in my palms each night, eight at a time from sweet pharmaceutical bottles I make arrangements for a pint-sized journey. I’m the queen of this condition., NR: 283, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: addict capsul palm night eight time sweet pharmaceut bottl make arrang pint size journey queen condit
TEXT:  I’m an expert on making the trip and now they say I’m an addict. Now they ask why. Why! Don’t they know that I promised to die! I’m keeping in practice. I’m merely staying in shape. The pills are a mother, but better, every color and as good as sour balls., NR: 284, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: expert make trip say addict ask know die keep practic mere shape pill mother better everi color good sour ball
TEXT:  I’m on a diet from death. Yes, I admit it has gotten to be a bit of a habit— blows eight at a time, socked in the eye, hauled away by the pink, the orange, the green and the white goodnights. I’m becoming something of a chemical mixture., NR: 285, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: diet death ye admit ha gotten bit habit blow eight time eye away pink orang green white becom someth chemic mixtur
TEXT:  That’s it! My supply of tablets has got to last for years and years. I like them more than I like me. Stubborn as hell, they won’t let go. It’s a kind of marriage. It’s a kind of war where I plant bombs inside of myself., NR: 286, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: suppli tablet ha got last year year like like stubborn hell let kind marriag kind war plant bomb insid
TEXT:  Yes I try to kill myself in small amounts, an innocuous occupation. Actually I’m hung up on it. But remember I don’t make too much noise. And frankly no one has to lug me out and I don’t stand there in my winding sheet., NR: 287, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ye tri kill small amount innocu occup actual hung rememb make much nois frankli one ha lug stand wind sheet
TEXT:  I’m a little buttercup in my yellow nightie eating my eight loaves in a row and in a certain order as in the laying on of hands or the black sacrament. It’s a ceremony but like any other sport it’s full of rules., NR: 288, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: littl buttercup yellow nighti eat eight loaf row certain order lay hand black sacrament ceremoni like sport full rule
TEXT:  It’s like a musical tennis match where my mouth keeps catching the ball. Then I lie on my altar elevated by the eight chemical kisses. What a lay me down this is with two pink, two orange, two green, two white goodnights., NR: 289, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: like music tenni match mouth keep catch ball lie altar elev eight chemic kiss lay two pink two orang two green two white
TEXT:  Fee-fi-fo-fum— Now I’m borrowed. Now I’m numb. First of February 1966., NR: 290, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: fee fum numb first
TEXT: LIVE Live or die, but don’t poison everything … Well, death’s been here for a long time— it has a hell of a lot to do with hell and suspicion of the eye and the religious objects and how I mourned them when they were made obscene by my dwarf-heart’s doodle., NR: 291, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: live live die poison everyth well death long time ha hell lot hell suspicion eye religi object made obscen dwarf heart doodl
TEXT:  The chief ingredient is mutilation. And mud, day after day, mud like a ritual, and the baby on the platter, cooked but still human, cooked also with little maggots, sewn onto it maybe by somebody’s mother, the damn bitch! Even so, I kept right on going on, a sort of human statement, lugging myself as if I were a sawed-off body in the trunk, the steamer trunk., NR: 292, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: chief ingredi mutil mud day day mud like ritual babi platter still human also littl maggot sewn onto mayb somebodi mother damn bitch even kept right go sort human statement saw bodi trunk steamer trunk
TEXT:  This became a perjury of the soul. It became an outright lie and even though I dressed the body it was still naked, still killed. It was caught in the first place at birth, like a fish. But I played it, dressed it up, dressed it up like somebody’s doll., NR: 293, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: perjuri soul outright lie even though dress bodi wa still nake still wa caught first place birth like fish dress dress like somebodi doll
TEXT:  Is life something you play? And all the time wanting to get rid of it? And further, everyone yelling at you to shut up. And no wonder! People don’t like to be told that you’re sick and then be forced to watch you come down with the hammer., NR: 294, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: life someth play time want get rid everyon yell shut wonder peopl like told sick forc watch come hammer
TEXT:  Today life opened inside me like an egg and there inside after considerable digging I found the answer. What a bargain! There was the sun, her yolk moving feverishly, tumbling her prize— and you realize that she does this daily! I’d known she was a purifier but I hadn’t thought she was solid, hadn’t known she was an answer., NR: 295, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: today life insid like egg insid consider dig found answer bargain wa sun yolk move feverishli tumbl prize realiz doe daili known wa purifi thought wa solid known wa answer
TEXT:  God! It’s a dream, lovers sprouting in the yard like celery stalks and better, a husband straight as a redwood, two daughters, two sea urchins, picking roses off my hackles. If I’m on fire they dance around it and cook marshmallows., NR: 296, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: god dream lover sprout yard like celeri stalk better husband straight redwood two daughter two sea urchin rose hackl fire danc around cook
TEXT:  And if I’m ice they simply skate on me in little ballet costumes. Here, all along, thinking I was a killer, anointing myself daily with my little poisons. But no. I’m an empress. I wear an apron. My typewriter writes., NR: 297, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: ice simpli skate littl ballet costum along think wa killer daili littl poison empress wear apron typewrit
TEXT:  It didn’t break the way it warned. Even crazy, I’m as nice as a chocolate bar. Even with the witches’ gymnastics they trust my incalculable city, my corruptible bed. O dearest three, I make a soft reply., NR: 298, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: break way even crazi nice chocol bar even witch gymnast trust incalcul citi corrupt bed three make soft repli
TEXT:  The witch comes on and you paint her pink. I come with kisses in my hood and the sun, the smart one, rolling in my arms. So I say Live and turn my shadow three times round to feed our puppies as they come, the eight Dalmatians we didn’t drown, despite the warnings: The abort! The destroy! Despite the pails of water that waited to drown them, to pull them down like stones, they came, each one headfirst, blowing bubbles the color of cataract-blue and fumbling for the tiny tits., NR: 299, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: witch come paint pink come kiss hood sun smart one roll arm say live turn shadow three time round feed puppi come eight drown despit warn abort destroy despit pail water drown pull like stone came one headfirst blow bubbl color cataract blue fumbl tini tit
TEXT:  Just last week, eight Dalmatians, ¾ of a lb., lined up like cord wood each like a birch tree. I promise to love more if they come, because in spite of cruelty and the stuffed railroad cars for the ovens, I am not what I expected., NR: 300, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: last week eight line like cord wood like birch tree promis love come spite cruelti stuf railroad car oven
TEXT:  Not an Eichmann. The poison just didn’t take. So I won’t hang around in my hospital shift, repeating The Black Mass and all of it. I say Live, Live because of the sun, the dream, the excitable gift. February the last, 1966., NR: 301, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: poison take around hospit shift black mass say live live sun dream excit gift last
TEXT: ABOUT THE AUTHOR Anne Sexton (1928–1974) was a Pulitzer Prize–winning American poet born in Newton, Massachusetts. She attended Garland Junior College for one year and briefly worked as a model. She married Alfred Muller Sexton II at age nineteen, and in 1953 gave birth to a daughter., NR: 302, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: author sexton wa prize win poet born newton garland junior colleg one year briefli work model marri muller sexton age nineteen gave birth daughter
TEXT:  Shortly after, she was diagnosed with postpartum depression, suffered her first mental breakdown, and was admitted to Westwood Lodge, a neuropsychiatric hospital to which she would repeatedly return for help., NR: 303, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: shortli wa depress first mental breakdown wa admit lodg hospit would repeatedli return help
TEXT:  In 1955, following the birth of her second daughter, Sexton suffered another breakdown and was hospitalized again; her children were sent to live with her husband’s parents. That same year, on her birthday, she attempted suicide., NR: 304, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: follow birth second daughter sexton anoth breakdown wa child sent live husband parent year birthday suicid
TEXT:  Sexton was encouraged by her doctor to pursue the interest in writing poetry she had developed in high school, and in the fall of 1957, she enrolled in a workshop at the Boston Center for Adult Education., NR: 305, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sexton wa doctor pursu interest write poetri high school fall enrol workshop boston center adult educ
TEXT:  In her introduction to Sexton’s Complete Poems, poet Maxine Kumin, who was in Sexton’s workshop and became her close friend, describes her belief that it was the writing of poetry that gave Sexton something to work toward and develop and thus enabled her to endure life for as long as she did., NR: 306, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: introduct sexton complet poem poet wa sexton workshop close friend belief wa write poetri gave sexton someth work toward develop thu endur life long
TEXT:  In 1974, at the age of forty-six, despite a successful writing career, Sexton lost her battle with mental illness and committed suicide. Like Robert Lowell, Sylvia Plath, W. D. Snodgrass (who exerted a great influence on her work), and other Confessional poets, Sexton offers the reader an intimate view of the emotional anguish that characterized her life., NR: 307, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: age forti six despit success write career sexton lost battl mental ill suicid like great influenc work confession poet sexton offer reader intim view emot anguish life
TEXT:  The experience of being a woman was a central issue in her poetry, and though she endured criticism for bringing subjects such as menstruation, abortion, and drug addiction into her work, her skill as a poet transcended the controversy over her subject matter., NR: 308, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: experi woman wa central issu poetri though critic subject menstruat abort drug addict work skill poet controversi subject matter
TEXT:  Sexton’s poetry collections include To Bedlam and Part Way Back, All My Pretty Ones, Transformations, and Live or Die, which won the Pulitzer Prize for poetry in 1967.., NR: 309, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sexton poetri collect includ bedlam part way back pretti one transform live die prize poetri
TEXT: EBOOKS BY ANNE SEXTON FROM OPEN ROAD MEDIA Available wherever ebooks are soldOpen Road Integrated Media is a digital publisher and multimedia content company. Open Road creates connections between authors and their audiences by marketing its ebooks through a new proprietary online platform, which uses premium video content and social media. Videos, Archival Documents, and New Releases Sign up for the Open Road Media newsletter and get news delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up now at www.openroadmedia.com/newsletters FIND OUT MORE AT WWW.OPENROADMEDIA.COM FOLLOW US: @openroadmedia and Facebook.com/OpenRoadMedia, NR: 310, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: sexton open road medium avail wherev road medium digit publish content compani open road connect author audienc market new proprietari platform us premium video content social medium video archiv document new releas sign open road medium newslett get news straight sign newslett find follow
TEXT: All rights reserved, including without limitation the right to reproduce this ebook or any portion thereof in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of the publisher. Copyright © 1966 by Anne Sexton Cover design by Greg Mortimer ISBN: 978-1-5040-3434-0 This edition published in 2016 by Open Road Integrated Media, Inc. 180 Maiden Lane New York, NY 10038 www.openroadmedia.com, NR: 311, Book ID: Anne Sexton Poems, Processed Text: right reserv without limit right reproduc portion thereof form mean whether electron mechan known hereinaft without express written permiss publish copyright sexton cover design edit open road medium maiden lane new york
