TEXT: R. BuckminsterFullerThe Kassler LecturesOther books in the series: Toyo Ito: Forces of Nature, Jessie Turnbull, ed.Publication is made possible in part by a grant from the Barr Ferree Foundation Fund, Department of Art and Archaeology, Princeton University., LINE: 0, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: book seri forc natur public made possibl part grant foundat fund depart art archaeolog univers
TEXT: R. BuckminsterFullerWORLD ManDaniel López-Pérez, editor with contributions by Alejandro Zaera-Polo and Stan AllenPrinceton University School of architectureandPrinceton Architectural Press New york6 Preface Alejandro Zaera-Polo, LINE: 1, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: editor contribut polo univers school architectur press new york prefac polo
TEXT: 12 Introduction Daniel López-Pérez32 World Man R. Buckminster Fuller102 Glossary Compiled by Daniel López-Pérez120 Geoscope—1960 R. Buckminster Fuller130 Postscript: R. Buckminster Fuller and Louis I. Kahn Stan Allen, LINE: 2, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: introduct world man fuller glossari fuller postscript fuller
TEXT: 142 Contributors143 IllustrationsContentsPrefaceThis volume is the second in a series of books based on the Kassler Lectures, held at the Princeton University School of Architecture. It documents the series’ inaugural address, delivered in 1966 by R. Buckminster Fuller (1895– 1983). Kenneth Stone Kassler (1905–64), in whose memory the lecture series was founded, attended the school and served as an instructor and design critic here for more than three decades. An admirer of Fuller, whose research into new building materials and technologies resonated with his own, Kassler was responsible for bringing the renowned inventor and author to Princeton for a series of visits throughout the 1950s and 1960s. During his extended presence on campus, Fuller acted as an animating force, lecturing, teaching seminars and studios, and engaging students in ground- breaking structural and cartographic experiments., LINE: 3, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: contributor volum second seri book base lectur univers school architectur document seri inaugur address fuller stone whose memori lectur seri wa school instructor design critic three decad admir fuller whose research new build materi technolog wa respons renown inventor author seri visit throughout extend presenc campu fuller anim forc teach seminar studio engag student ground break structur cartograph experi
TEXT: The publication of Fuller’s lecture today is timely. The text testifies to a period when the School of Architecture was invested in the exploration of new technologies and counted among its ranks figures who best represented architecture’s active involvement with science. The convergence of Fuller and other design scientists such as Victor and Aladar Olgyay (widely considered the fathers of environmental architecture) at Princeton in the mid-twentieth century gave rise to a culture of technology that has since nearly disappeared and needs to be reinvigorated. For a brief time, Princeton functioned as a laboratory and broadcasting device for important techno­ logical and structural advances in architecture., LINE: 4, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: public fuller lectur today time text period school architectur wa explor new technolog among rank figur best architectur activ involv scienc converg fuller design scientist victor wide consid father environment architectur mid twentieth centuri gave rise cultur technolog ha sinc nearli need brief time laboratori devic import logic structur advanc architectur
TEXT: Fuller’s reliance on collective experimentation at the school traces a model of education committed to capturing the innovations of the moment rather than reinforcing long-standing academic traditions, styles, or pedagogy., LINE: 5, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller relianc collect experiment school trace model educ innov moment rather long stand academ tradit style pedagogi
TEXT: 6That educational model, based on the agility and flexibility needed to rapidly confront urgent social or environmental issues, seems particularly appropriate today as a strategy to exploit the size and qualities of the Princeton School of Architecture., LINE: 6, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: educ model base agil flexibl rapidli confront urgent social environment issu particularli appropri today strategi exploit size qualiti school architectur
TEXT: Fuller’s profile is one of breathtaking currency. The indefatigable polemicist and educator had a difficult relationship with architecture. Lacking formal training, he constantly remained on the edge of the profession, never fully accepted by his fellow architects; nor was he embraced by the scientific community, which looked down on him as someone without the requisite credentials or disciplinary rigor. A follower of the gay science tradition, Fuller was forced to defend his role as a public intellectual who tinkered with architecture and engineering, ecology and economy in order to transform them all., LINE: 7, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller profil one currenc indefatig polemicist educ difficult relationship architectur formal train constantli edg profess never fulli accept fellow architect wa scientif commun someon without requisit credenti disciplinari rigor follow gay scienc tradit fuller wa forc defend role public intellectu architectur engin ecolog economi order transform
TEXT: The public, in fact, was much more appreciative of Fuller’s ideas than any of the professionals whose fields he intersected. Possibly the best-known architectural figure of his era, Fuller had a tremendous capacity to ignite public interest in his projects and their causes. This capacity marks his career as a precursor of what professional practice has now become, with architects needing to interact with a growing list of stakeholders and public interfaces throughout the process of making a building., LINE: 8, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: public fact wa much appreci fuller idea profession whose field possibl best known architectur figur era fuller tremend capac ignit public interest project caus capac mark career precursor profession practic ha becom architect need interact grow list stakehold public interfac throughout process make build
TEXT: Other aspects of Fuller’s 1966 lecture at Princeton similarly forecast critical issues facing architecture today. The lecture’s title, “World Man,” not only alludes to the speaker’s “world citizenship” (Fuller famously wore two watches—one set to his office’s time and the other set to the local time, LINE: 9, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: aspect fuller lectur similarli forecast critic issu face architectur today lectur titl world man speaker world citizenship fuller famous wore two watch one set offic time set local time
TEXT: 7of whatever country he found himself in) but also clearly acknowledges that many of the problems architects faced at the time were global in nature. Fuller’s lecture of a half-century ago anticipated what is now common knowledge: that local actions have universal consequences. Architecture, for Fuller, required a global scope of vision., LINE: 10, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: whatev countri found also clearli mani problem architect face time global natur fuller lectur half centuri ago common knowledg local action univers consequ architectur fuller global scope vision
TEXT: Fuller addresses ecology and the environment in his lecture, having already identified these as crucial subjects for architecture. His references to energy, fossil fuels, food, and pollution describe the modern world as an ecosystem to be reconciled with nature. Again, we need to remind ourselves that it was 1966, before the first oil crisis and the emergence of broad ecological consciousness. Coincidentally, this lecture took place the same year Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture was published., LINE: 11, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller address ecolog environ lectur alreadi crucial subject architectur refer energi fossil fuel food pollut describ modern world ecosystem natur need remind wa first oil crisi emerg broad ecolog conscious coincident lectur took place year complex contradict architectur wa
TEXT: In his talk, Fuller also anticipates our present knowledge-based economy. He refers constantly to economic processes, as if capitalist development could actually become an integral part of natural ecosystems and political frameworks. For Fuller, patents were an essential part of the new knowledge economy; the architect/scientist was less an artist or technician than an entrepreneur who redefines the regimes of power surrounding practice in order to retrieve agency from the more conventional modes of patronage. This entrepreneurial orientation foreshadows the various forms of archi- tectural agency that we are experiencing now, which similarly defy the tradi- tional relations between architects and clients. Through these approaches, the discipline becomes truly political., LINE: 12, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: talk fuller also present knowledg base economi constantli econom process capitalist develop could actual becom integr part natur ecosystem polit framework fuller patent essenti part new knowledg economi architect scientist wa less artist technician entrepreneur regim power surround practic order retriev agenc convent mode patronag entrepreneuri orient variou form agenc similarli defi relat architect client approach disciplin becom truli polit
TEXT: 8Fuller’s understanding of the political engagement of architecture and technology is genuinely prophetic. At a time when the cosmopolitical has become a common subject of discussion across the sciences and humanities, Fuller’s global, eco-systemic, entrepreneurial, and political view of architec- tural practice perfectly embodies the contemporary notion that a politics not attached to the cosmos is moot and that a cosmos detached from politics is irrelevant. This book, the crystallization of an event that occurred several decades ago at Princeton, can be read as a visionary moment in the history of the discipline. And isn’t that capacity to be visionary and experimental, to capture and forecast the emerging, the true task of a school of architecture?, LINE: 13, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller understand polit engag architectur technolog genuin prophet time cosmopolit ha becom common subject discuss across scienc human fuller global system entrepreneuri polit view practic perfectli contemporari notion polit attach cosmo moot cosmo detach polit irrelev book crystal event sever decad ago read visionari moment histori disciplin capac visionari experiment captur forecast true task school architectur
TEXT: I would like to thank Stan Allen, my predecessor as dean, for initiating, in association with Princeton Architectural Press, the series of books that document the Kassler Lectures, and for mobilizing the infrastructure to make this particular volume happen., LINE: 14, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: would like thank predecessor dean associ architectur press seri book document lectur infrastructur make particular volum happen
TEXT:  I would also like to extend my thanks to Daniel López-Pérez for his thorough analysis of the lecture and his work in produc- ing the book; to Daniel Claro for his discovery of Fuller’s manuscript in the Archive of the School of Architecture; to former dean Robert Geddes for his important contribution to the book; to the Barr Ferree Foundation Publication Fund at Princeton University, which generously supported this publication; to the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of San Diego, which kindly provided funds to the project’s editor through a Faculty Research Grant; to John Ferry of the R., LINE: 15, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: would also like extend thank thorough analysi lectur work ing book claro discoveri fuller manuscript archiv school architectur former dean import contribut book foundat public fund univers gener public colleg art scienc univers san kindli provid fund project editor faculti research grant ferri
TEXT:  Buckminster Fuller Estate and to Chuck Hoberman for their help with obtaining images; to Nancy Eklund Later for her editorial contribution; and to Alice Chung for her inventive book design.., LINE: 16, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller estat chuck help imag nanci later editori contribut invent book design
TEXT: —Alejandro Zaera-Polo9 Zaera-Polo: preface10Letter to Robert Geddes, dean of the Princeton School of Architecture, handwritten by Anne Hewlett Fuller and signed by R. Buckminster Fuller, Bear Island, Maine, 26 August 1966, LINE: 17, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: polo polo prefac letter dean school architectur fuller fuller bear island august
TEXT: 11IntroductionDaniel López-Pérez12On August 26, 1966, Richard Buckminster Fuller wrote to Robert Geddes, accepting the invitation of the recently appointed dean of the Princeton University School of Architecture and Urban Planning to deliver the inaugural Kenneth Stone Kassler Memorial Lecture. In a hand- written letter dictated to his wife, Anne Hewlett Fuller, and signed by him, Fuller cautioned Geddes that he would “speak entirely extemporaneously, without notes.” A month or so later, on October 5, Fuller addressed an audience of architec- ture students, faculty, and area practi- tioners in a process of “thinking out loud cumulatively,” as had become “the pattern for [his] life.” Speaking on themes he had been rehearsing in his mind for decades, Fuller delivered one of his most compel- ling assessments of the struggles facing man in the mid-twentieth century.1, LINE: 18, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: august fuller wrote invit recent dean univers school architectur urban deliv inaugur stone memori lectur hand written letter wife fuller fuller would speak entir without note month later fuller audienc student faculti area process think loud cumul becom pattern life speak theme mind decad fuller one compel ling assess struggl face man mid twentieth centuri
TEXT: Fuller opened his lecture by telling of how he had recently been asked by a national magazine to imagine being appointed Building Commissioner of the United States. The editors were inter- ested to know what he, if given the power, would do to solve the nation’s significant urban problems. Fuller quickly dismissed the very idea as enforcing one’s will upon others—an ineffectual way of approach- ing these problems, he maintained, given the natural checks and balances of evolu- tion. Looking beyond the post of U.S. commissioner, or “building czar” of the “political state,” Fuller mused on grander aspirations: “Why not...make me world, LINE: 19, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller lectur tell recent nation magazin imagin build commission unit state editor inter know given power would solv nation signific urban problem fuller quickli idea one upon ineffectu way approach ing problem given natur check balanc look beyond post commission build czar polit state fuller muse aspir make world
TEXT: czar of building,” or better yet, “czar of building the Universe?” The problem this posed, Fuller conceded, was that that position was already filled. “I am deeply impressed,” he confessed, “with the designer of the universe; I am confident I couldn’t have done anywhere near such a good job., LINE: 20, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: czar build better yet czar build univers problem fuller conced wa posit wa alreadi fill deepli design univers confid done anywher near good job
TEXT: ” Instead, Fuller made his mission the study of the universe and of its “extraordinary design.” It was in the space between national “czar of building” and “czar of building the Universe”—between influenc- ing a nation and changing the world— that Fuller envisioned his role., LINE: 21, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: instead fuller made mission studi univers extraordinari design wa space nation czar build czar build univers ing nation world fuller role
TEXT:  His was a search to understand man’s place in the world and the world’s place in the universe. He pursued this, in his Kassler address as in his long and productive career, by starting with the questions: What is man doing in the Universe? What is he supposed to be doing? What does he think he is doing? When Fuller arrived at Princeton to deliver his lecture, the seventy-one-year- old was already a well-known figure in contemporary architecture and design., LINE: 22, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: wa search understand man place world world place univers address long product career start question man univers suppos doe think fuller deliv lectur seventi one year old wa alreadi well known figur contemporari architectur design
TEXT:  In January 1964, he had been profiled in Time magazine. The inventor of “houses that fly and bathrooms without water... cars and maps and ways of living bearing the mysterious word ‘Dymaxion,’” Fuller was “best known” at the time, the editors asserted, for his “massive mid-century breakthrough known as the ‘geodesic dome., LINE: 23, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: time magazin inventor hous fli bathroom without water car map way live bear mysteri word fuller wa best known time editor massiv mid centuri breakthrough known geodes dome
TEXT: ’”2 His early work on industrialized housing and his studies of structural., LINE: 24, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: earli work hous studi structur
TEXT: 13Tensegrity Sphere, built on the Princeton University campus by Fuller and students, featured in the 27 November 1953 edition of the Princeton Alumni Weekly. The cover caption reads, “With the help of the fire department apparatus, graduate students put the final touches on an architectural experiment which has excited nationwide attention.”, LINE: 25, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: sphere built univers campu fuller student featur edit alumnu weekli cover caption read help fire depart apparatu graduat student put final touch architectur experi ha excit nationwid attent
TEXT: 14geometry had culminated in the 1950s in his development of the geodesic dome and his articulation of the geodesic and tensegrity principles that under- pinned it. Designed to provide maximum volumetric enclosure and environmental control using a minimum of means, Fuller’s invention found a ready audience during the postwar period and quickly proliferated around the globe., LINE: 26, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: geometri develop geodes dome articul geodes principl pin design provid maximum volumetr enclosur environment control minimum mean fuller invent found readi audienc postwar period quickli around globe
TEXT: 3 In 1966 he was at work on his geodesic tour de force—the United States Pavilion for the World’s Fair—which would open a year later in Montreal at Expo ’67. If Fuller’s domes brought him great public notoriety, they also earned him a place in the pantheon of modern archi- tecture., LINE: 27, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: wa work geodes tour forc unit state pavilion world fair would open year later fuller dome brought great public notorieti also place pantheon modern
TEXT:  In the mid-1950s, a scale model of one of his geodesic domes joined the collection of the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York, and in 1960 his two-mile hemispherical Dome over Midtown Manhattan featured prominently in the museum’s Visionary Architecture exhibition., LINE: 28, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: mid scale model one geodes dome collect museum modern art new york two mile hemispher dome featur promin museum visionari architectur exhibit
TEXT: 4 Fuller’s reputation as a tech- nological visionary had been confirmed a year earlier, when Arthur Drexler, director of the Department of Architecture and Design, installed three of his “mathe­ matical structures” in MoMA’s outdoor sculpture garden., LINE: 29, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller reput tech visionari confirm year director depart architectur design three structur outdoor sculptur garden
TEXT: 5 Alongside bronzes by Gaston Lachaise and Aristide Maillol, Drexler exhibited a geodesic dome, tensegrity mast, and space frame, in an effort to add “new grist to the modern architectural discourse.” The exhibition succeeded in drawing thousands of., LINE: 30, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: alongsid bronz geodes dome mast space frame effort add new grist modern architectur discours exhibit draw thousand
TEXT: visitors to what trustees of the museum later acknowledged was “essentially a show of structural engineering.”6 A photograph of the structures, illuminated at night in the museum’s courtyard, has become ubiquitous in Fuller’s monographs. Fuller never trained as an architect, but his influence on contemporary archi- tecture—although in no way normative— was beyond dispute the year he lectured at Princeton. Seventeen of his most significant patents related to structural and cartographic innovations had already been granted, and a vast number of articles documenting his inventions had appeared in the architectural press. In 1962 a monograph devoted to his work, edited by John McHale, was published as part of George Braziller’s popular Makers of Contemporary Architecture series. As McHale explained elsewhere around that time, “Any discussion of the impact of technology on architecture... must, inevitably, involve due consid- eration of the unique contribution of Buckminster Fuller.”7, LINE: 31, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: visitor truste museum later acknowledg wa essenti show structur engin photograph structur illumin night museum courtyard ha becom ubiquit fuller monograph fuller never train architect influenc contemporari although way norm wa beyond disput year seventeen signific patent relat structur cartograph innov alreadi vast number articl invent architectur press monograph devot work wa part popular maker contemporari architectur seri elsewher around time discuss impact technolog architectur must inevit involv due uniqu contribut fuller
TEXT: Fuller’s notoriety may have come from inventing a number of revolutionary artifacts, but his “unique contribution” in the professional sphere came from the concepts, or operative principles, he explored through those works— concepts that had the power to alter man’s relationship to the world. “In 1927,” Fuller explained, “I made a bargain with myself that I’d discover the principles operative in the universe and turn them, LINE: 32, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller notorieti may come number revolutionari artifact uniqu contribut profession sphere came concept oper principl work concept power alter man relationship world fuller made bargain discov principl oper univers turn
TEXT: 15 López-Pérez: introductionover to my fellow men.”8 Fuller spent much of the 1950s and 1960s circling the globe, hosting workshops and lecturing on these principles; a charis- matic and infatigable speaker, he arguably asserted greater influence with his words than with his inventions., LINE: 33, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fellow men fuller spent much circl globe host workshop principl speaker greater influenc word invent
TEXT: 9 But the common thread of Fuller’s output was these operating principles: “He [saw] himself quite simply,” Time observed, “as a kind of techno­ logical avatar, come for the liberation of mankind.” As Geddes explained when introduc- ing Fuller to the Princeton audience, the mission of the Kassler Lectures was to bring to the university distinguished speakers from the “field of environmental design,” which he defined as “the field of architecture, engineering, industrial design, city planning and its related arts., LINE: 34, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: common thread fuller output wa oper principl saw quit simpli time kind logic come liber mankind ing fuller audienc mission lectur wa bring univers distinguish speaker field environment design defin field architectur engin industri design citi relat art
TEXT: ” Fuller was an ideal inaugural speaker, given that his research cut across these disciplines, which had previously been considered distinct areas of study. Geddes called Fuller “hard to classify... either [an] engineer or architect or inventor or discoverer or geographer or mathematician or all of these,” proof of the importance the dean attributed to the cross-disciplinary nature of Fuller’s research., LINE: 35, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller wa ideal inaugur speaker given research cut across disciplin previous consid distinct area studi fuller hard either engin architect inventor discover geograph mathematician proof import dean cross disciplinari natur fuller research
TEXT:  At the height of his professional career and public influence, the mature Fuller provided an extraordinary point of departure for the new lecture series.10., LINE: 36, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: height profession career public influenc matur fuller provid extraordinari point departur new lectur seri
TEXT: Fuller had brought his ideas to Princeton previously. In 1953 the“advocate of the theory of light-weight, over-all economy in building” constructed on its campus “the largest discontinuous compression sphere ever to be erected.”11 The sphere was built by students in front of the Architectural Laboratory, a center for experimentation in environ- mental studies and technology founded by Princeton’s School of Architecture in 1949. During an impressive two-week period, Fuller and his team constructed the sphere from ninety 1½-inch aluminum struts held together by a network of 3⁄16- inch steel aircraft cables. The structure enclosed 32,000 cubic feet, or enough volume to accommodate a 2,000-square- foot, eight-room, two-story dwelling. The virtue of this remarkable structure was its lightness: whereas the equivalent volume built from traditional housing materials would weigh an average of 150 tons, this sphere weighed only 650 pounds.12, LINE: 37, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller brought idea previous advoc theori light weight economi build campu discontinu compress sphere ever sphere wa built student front architectur laboratori center experiment environ mental studi technolog school architectur impress two week period fuller team sphere nineti inch aluminum strut togeth network inch steel aircraft cabl structur cubic foot enough volum accommod squar foot eight room two stori dwell virtu remark structur wa light wherea equival volum built tradit hous materi would weigh averag ton sphere weigh pound
TEXT: Giving form to the sphere was Fuller’s principle of “discontinuous-compression.” As he would later define in his “Tensile- Integrity Structures” patent, a discontinuous- compression structure comprised a combination of compression members in the shape of “struts.” Held together by cables, or “slings,” these members worked in tension in such a way as to evenly distribute structural forces without any strut touching any other strut, thus producing the principle of “discontinuous- compression.”13 The essence of “Tensile- Integrity Structures” resided “in the discovery of how to progressively reduce, LINE: 38, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: give form sphere wa fuller principl discontinu compress would later defin tensil integr structur patent discontinu compress structur compris combin compress member shape strut togeth cabl sling member work tension way evenli distribut structur forc without strut touch strut thu principl discontinu compress essenc tensil integr structur discoveri progress reduc
TEXT: 16Tensegrity Sphere. The 40-foot sphere was built from 90 independent metal struts held together by a network of cables, which evenly distributed loads throughout the lightweight structure.17 López-Pérez: introduction, LINE: 39, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: sphere foot sphere wa built independ metal strut togeth network cabl evenli distribut load throughout lightweight structur introduct
TEXT: Geoscope, constructed inside Princeton’s Architectural Lab by Fuller and students, featured in the 6 April 1960 edition of the New York Times. Unambiguously modeled on planet Earth, the globe map, Fuller claimed, was four times larger than any accurate cartographic sphere in existence at the time., LINE: 40, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: insid architectur lab fuller student featur edit new york time unambigu planet earth globe map fuller wa four time accur cartograph sphere exist time
TEXT: 18the aspect of compression in a structure so that...the structure will have the aspect of continuous tension throughout and the compression will be subjugated so that the compression elements become small islands in a sea of tension., LINE: 41, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: aspect compress structur structur aspect continu tension throughout compress compress element becom small island sea tension
TEXT: ”14 For Fuller, the general shift away from compression and toward tension aimed to “bring the slenderness, lightness and strength of the suspension bridge cable into the realm previously dominated by the compression columns concept of building., LINE: 42, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller gener shift away compress toward tension bring slender light strength suspens bridg cabl realm previous domin compress column concept build
TEXT: ”15 His invention produced an effect “akin to taking some of the compression out of the ‘compression towers,’ i.e. the columns, walls, and roof, of a building through the creation of a structure having discontinuous compres- sion and continuous tension [in which] the islands of compression in the mast are progressively reduced in individual size and total mass., LINE: 43, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: invent produc effect akin take compress compress tower column wall roof build creation structur discontinu sion continu tension island compress mast progress reduc individu size total mass
TEXT: ”16 By reducing the overall structural mass through an assemblage of struts that do not touch and by increasing the ratio of tension over compression through the use of cables, Fuller discovered strength through lightness., LINE: 44, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: reduc overal structur mass assemblag strut touch increas ratio tension compress use cabl fuller discov strength light
TEXT:  As he notes in his Kassler lecture, he envisioned this architectural experiment as “point[ing] the way to practical solutions of actual building problems.” Discontinuous- compression domes had the potential to revolutionize the construction industry, and they formed the basis of a number of important patents Fuller would apply for and receive., LINE: 45, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: note lectur architectur experi point ing way practic solut actual build problem discontinu compress dome potenti revolution construct industri form basi number import patent fuller would appli receiv
TEXT: 17., LINE: 46, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: But the Princeton project demonstrated something more than structural efficiency. In an article entitled “The Sphere of Ideas,” published in the Princeton Alumni Weekly, the model was described as representing nothing less than the “characteristic structural principle of the universe., LINE: 47, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: project someth structur effici articl sphere idea alumnu weekli model wa noth less characterist structur principl univers
TEXT: ” It was “no accident,” the article explained, “that the sphere is 40 feet in diameter. Mr. Fuller believes that the discontinuous compression principle is the characteristic structural principle of the universe., LINE: 48, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: wa accid articl sphere foot diamet fuller belief discontinu compress principl characterist structur principl univers
TEXT:  And with a 40-foot diameter, his sphere becomes a sort of scale model of the world, at 1:1,000,000.”18 For Fuller, Princeton’s discontinuous-compression sphere was both a revolutionary architectural solution, unprecedented in its scale and lightness, and a conceptual model of the universe itself., LINE: 49, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: foot diamet sphere becom sort scale model world fuller discontinu compress sphere wa revolutionari architectur solut unpreced scale light conceptu model univers
TEXT:  As such, it served to illustrate his belief that experimentation in search of a better understanding of nature’s operative principles was key to the future well-being of mankind and the universe. In the spring of 1960, Fuller returned to Princeton to build another sphere with students, this time in the form of a geo- scope, unambiguously modeled on planet Earth., LINE: 50, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: illustr belief experiment search better understand natur oper principl wa key futur well mankind univers spring fuller return build anoth sphere student time form geo scope unambigu planet earth
TEXT:  Claimed by Fuller to be four times larger than any accurate cartographic sphere in existence, the 6 ½-foot sphere was constructed of metal tubing and sev- eral layers of clear plastic film, inscribed with illustrations of the continents., LINE: 51, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller four time accur cartograph sphere exist foot sphere wa metal tube eral layer clear plastic film illustr contin
TEXT:  It was suspended inside the large, glazed room., LINE: 52, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: wa suspend insid larg glaze room
TEXT: 19 López-Pérez: introductionof the Architectural Lab, a space used to research natural daylighting effects on scaled architectural models, and it was a great cartographic achievement. The Daily Princetonian hailed it as the “best globe map., LINE: 53, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: architectur lab space use research natur effect scale architectur model wa great cartograph achiev daili best globe map
TEXT: ..ever built.”19 Fuller had iden- tified a problem with Mercator projection, commonly used in mapping the Earth, which subdivided the planet’s surface into squares by means of latitudinal and longi- tudinal lines., LINE: 54, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: ever built fuller problem project commonli use earth planet surfac squar mean latitudin line
TEXT:  “You cannot put a square on a sphere,” he insisted.20 In his Dymaxion Map patent of 1946, Fuller presented an alternative method of charting the globe by inscribing a polyhedron within a sphere and projecting the Earth’s surface on its triangular faces., LINE: 55, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: cannot put squar sphere map patent fuller altern method chart globe polyhedron within sphere project earth surfac triangular face
TEXT:  This method of subdivision produced less distortion than either its square predecessor or other known cartographic systems of projec- tion. Thus, the geoscope offered a more accurate representation of the Earth’s forms and landmasses., LINE: 56, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: method subdivis produc less distort either squar predecessor known cartograph system thu accur represent earth form
TEXT:  Fuller had built a geoscope previously, at Cornell University in 1952. Although the Cornell model was much larger, the Princeton version was more intricate and arguably more accurate.21 At Princeton, he separated the geodesic structure from the transparent surface of the globe so that the natural geographic properties of the Earth and the conceptual lines of his geometry could be studied independently but also viewed in juxtaposition., LINE: 57, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller built previous univers although model wa much version wa intric accur geodes structur transpar surfac globe natur geograph properti earth conceptu line geometri could studi independ also juxtaposit
TEXT:  In a vol- ume documenting the project’s construc- tion, James Robert Hillier (a professor in the School of Architecture who was a., LINE: 58, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: vol ume project professor school architectur wa
TEXT: student of Fuller at the time) describes the model’s capacity to integrate multiple layers of information on its surface in order to visualize relationships between vast amounts of data as the project’s greatest potential. “The system of lights on the Geoscope,” Hillier observed, “would allow a visitor to locate his house on the Earth through a complex system of IBM machines.” The light system simi- larly facilitated “plotting the location of ships on the oceans...[and] the migration of masses and raw materials.” The geo- scope could serve as a measuring tool for diagramming complex relationships and also projecting them in time—both back- ward into history and into the future:, LINE: 59, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: student fuller time model capac integr multipl layer inform surfac order visual relationship vast amount data project potenti system light would allow visitor locat hous earth complex system machin light system plot locat ship ocean migrat mass raw materi geo scope could serv measur tool complex relationship also project time back ward histori futur
TEXT: Using the same system of lights and computers it could be possible to diagram the history of the world’s weather and then, by studying the trends or simply by speeding up the computer so that it had the momen- tum to carry its diagram ahead by a few years, it could be possible to make general predictions on the world’s future weather.22, LINE: 60, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: system light comput could possibl diagram histori world weather trend simpli speed comput tum carri diagram ahead year could possibl make gener predict world futur weather
TEXT: In a letter discussing his geoscope projects, Fuller described them as “unexpectedly” marrying his geographical and geodesic structural explorations into a single model, a demonstration that in his mind these had become effec- tively one and the same.23 The structural models represented the organizational protocols of natural form and could in, LINE: 61, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: letter project fuller unexpectedli marri geograph geodes structur explor singl model demonstr mind becom one structur model organiz protocol natur form could
TEXT: 20Fuller, surrounded by geodesic models in the Architectural Lab at Princeton, about 195321 López-Pérez: introductionGeoscope, constructed of clear plastic inscribed with the continents and hung from a network of hollow metal tubing, about 1960, LINE: 62, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller surround geodes model architectur lab clear plastic contin hung network hollow metal tube
TEXT: 22turn be used as measuring devices for mapping and measuring the Earth’s geography. The geoscope proved a useful tool for geographers, but Fuller’s intended audience for his invention was architects. As he explained to a New York Times reporter, he created the project to “provide a better comprehension of world geography to help architects plan their work in a larger perspective., LINE: 63, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: turn use measur devic measur earth geographi prove use tool geograph fuller intend audienc invent wa architect new york time report project provid better comprehens world geographi help architect plan work perspect
TEXT: ”24 That perspective reflected Fuller’s holistic view of Earth and challenged the image of humankind as somehow independent of the environment. The clear surface of the Princeton Geoscope could be read both from outside the sphere looking in toward the center and from inside the sphere looking out at the firmament., LINE: 64, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: perspect reflect fuller holist view earth imag humankind somehow independ environ clear surfac could read outsid sphere look toward center insid sphere look firmament
TEXT:  Looking in, one could view Earth’s geography more accurately than ever before, whereas looking out, one could begin to determine one’s position within an ever-expanding universe. This two-way perspective underscored the basic relativity of human perception: the expanding universe was simultaneously “your private sky., LINE: 65, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: look one could view earth geographi accur ever wherea look one could begin determin one posit within ever expand univers two way perspect basic rel human percept expand univers wa simultan privat sky
TEXT: ” By creating an instrument that contextual- ized the individual’s relative point of view, Fuller helped the world look at itself.25., LINE: 66, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: instrument contextu individu rel point view fuller world look
TEXT: In his 1953 and 1960 visits to Princeton, Fuller formulated and explored cartographic and structural concepts by constructing physical models. In his 1966 Kassler lecture, he also built conceptual models, but this time with words. He engaged his audience in open dialogue,, LINE: 67, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: visit fuller cartograph structur concept physic model lectur also built conceptu model time word engag audienc open dialogu
TEXT: using language as a platform for representing relationships between the conceptual and the physical, the cognitive and the experiential. Deciphering the meaning of Fuller’s words constitutes a collective process of “experimentation” in itself, as the correspondence between word and idea remained for Fuller the subject of continual exploration rather than exposition.26, LINE: 68, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: languag platform relationship conceptu physic cognit experienti mean fuller word collect process experiment correspond word idea fuller subject continu explor rather exposit
TEXT: Fuller structures his lecture using clear, deductive logic. He starts with a number of concepts, many of which he introduces as dualities: “brain” and “mind,” the “physical” and the “metaphysi- cal,” the “entropic” and the “antientropic., LINE: 69, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller structur lectur clear deduct logic start number concept mani dualiti brain mind physic cal
TEXT: ” From these dualities he posits a “theory of functions”: functions are relational and exist “only by virtue of the always and only coexistence of other functions.” He proceeds by offering generalizations of increasing complexity regarding these opposing functions., LINE: 70, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: dualiti posit theori function function relat exist virtu alway coexist function proce offer gener increas complex regard oppos function
TEXT:  These generaliza- tions give rise to new words whose accrued meanings are clear only within the context of Fuller’s developing narrative. While “dymaxion”—a synthe- sis of “dynamic” and “maximum” that refers to Fuller’s concept of employing tech­nology and resources to maximum advantage with minimal expenditure of energy and material—is perhaps the most famous neologism in Fuller’s idio- syncratic lexicon, countless other terms are introduced throughout his 1966 lecture and in its associated literature., LINE: 71, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: give rise new word whose mean clear within context fuller narr si dynam maximum fuller concept tech resourc maximum advantag minim expenditur energi materi perhap famou neolog fuller lexicon countless term throughout lectur associ literatur
TEXT: 27., LINE: 72, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: 23 López-Pérez: introductionIn his talk, Fuller raises a number of questions about our relationship to the environment across all scales, from the personal to the cosmic. He identifies dual universes: the physical universe, which is “entropic” and “expansive, increasingly diffuse, increasingly dis­orderly”; and our cognitive understanding of the universe, which is “antientropic” and increasingly ordered., LINE: 73, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: talk fuller rais number question relationship environ across scale person cosmic dual univers physic univers expans increasingli diffus increasingli di orderli cognit understand univers increasingli order
TEXT:  Within these two opposing orders, Fuller seeks a balance. In view of the continual oscillation between “physical expansion” and “metaphysical contraction” in the universe, he expresses his wonder at nature’s anticipatory capacity for regeneration., LINE: 74, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: within two oppos order fuller seek balanc view continu oscil physic expans metaphys contract univers express wonder natur anticipatori capac regener
TEXT:  In the face of what he describes as our “total envi- ronmental challenge,” Fuller points to our “antientropic effectiveness” as our capacity as “prime designers” to find new forms of order and principles., LINE: 75, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: face total challeng fuller point effect capac prime design find new form order principl
TEXT:  Essential to this process of balance and regeneration is an expanded notion of “wealth,” one that for Fuller is not based purely on material resources but also includes social accountability. He defines this wealth as “the organized capability to deal with our forward metabolic regeneration., LINE: 76, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: essenti process balanc regener expand notion wealth one fuller base pure materi resourc also social account wealth organ capabl deal forward metabol regener
TEXT: ” A feedback loop between material and social resources emerges: “[T]he more we use our real wealth, which is this organized capability, the more it improves and the more it increases.” Fuller sees our chances of reaching this “organized capability for forward regeneration” as “magnificently weighted on the side of success., LINE: 77, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: feedback loop materi social resourc use real wealth organ capabl increas fuller see chanc reach organ capabl forward regener magnific weight side success
TEXT: ” It is in., LINE: 78, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: our capacity to translate “material” into “energy wealth” that he finds our true potential to harness the existing “energy flows of the universe” in order to “do the most with the least.” Fuller closes the lecture by focusing on social accountability. Aligning his aspirations with those of a younger generation—whose loyalty he describes as centered not on family, university, or even country but rather on the world— he makes a prophecy: “[T]he young world is about to take the initiative as inventor-scientist, and in the employing of principles which are operative in universities will succeed in converting the resources available to us to such a high order of effectiveness as to take care of 100% of humanity.”28, LINE: 79, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: capac translat materi energi wealth find true potenti har energi flow univers order least fuller close lectur social account aspir younger gener whose loyalti center famili univers even countri rather world make propheci young world take initi inventor scientist principl oper univers succeed convert resourc avail high order effect take care human
TEXT: Fuller’s spherical models can be understood today as oscillating between concrete physical artifacts that revolu- tionized the worlds of structural design, shelter, and cartography on the one hand and dynamic representations of nature and of our relationship to the environ- ment on the other. Similarly, the terms of Fuller’s lecture synthesize their literal and conceptual meanings in search of the most comprehensive knowledge of both— of man in his world. The spherical models constructed on the Princeton campus and the words and concepts developed in the Kassler lecture can be seen as material and conceptual experiments in the fluid and irreducible relationship between the physical and the metaphysical,, LINE: 80, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller spheric model understood today oscil concret physic artifact world structur design shelter cartographi one hand dynam represent natur relationship environ similarli term fuller lectur synthes liter conceptu mean search comprehens knowledg man world spheric model campu word concept lectur seen materi conceptu experi fluid irreduc relationship physic metaphys
TEXT: 24Princeton students building geodesic models alongside the Tensegrity Sphere, in front of the Architectural Lab, 1953Geoscope, featured on the cover of the 22 April 1960 edition of the Princeton Alumni Weekly, LINE: 81, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: student build geodes model alongsid sphere front architectur lab featur cover edit alumnu weekli
TEXT: 26ultimately transforming our understand- ing of both. As the lecture’s title, “World Man,” suggests, Fuller reimagines the relationship between ourselves and our environment, constructing a new future that continues to reshape the present., LINE: 82, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: ultim transform understand ing lectur titl world man fuller relationship environ new futur reshap present
TEXT:  Today scholars continue to rediscover Fuller and deepen our understanding of his legacy. For Buckminster Fuller: Starting with the Universe, the retro­ spective held at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York in 2008, K., LINE: 83, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: today scholar continu rediscov fuller deepen understand legaci fuller start univers museum art new york
TEXT:  Michael Hays described Fuller’s progression from the 4-D system of the 1920s to the versions of the geoscope in the 1950s and 1960s as based on the development of a “geological diagram”: a “system in terms of movements, dis- tances, patterns, and intensities., LINE: 84, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: hay fuller progress system version base develop geolog diagram system term movement di pattern intens
TEXT: ..that is centered on the Earth as an envi- ronment and a planet in a cosmos.”29 Hays emphasizes that Fuller’s geologi- cal diagram is not “an abstraction that transcends all possible experience,” but rather “an empirical system of differen- tial relations that creates and organizes actual times, movements, trajectories, and ultimately sensations., LINE: 85, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: center earth planet cosmo hay fuller cal diagram abstract possibl experi rather empir system relat actual time movement trajectori ultim sensat
TEXT: ”30., LINE: 86, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: Hays argues that Fuller’s geoscope is endowed with the “cognitive and perceptual” possibilities of “a ‘macro- micro-Universe-information’ machine, geo-info-video-dome for the comparative display of flows, patterns, and intensities of population, climate, geology, sociology, finance, and their distributions and inter- actions.”31 In this sense, the geoscope, LINE: 87, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: hay fuller cognit perceptu possibl macro micro univers inform machin geo video dome compar display flow pattern intens popul climat geolog sociolog financ distribut inter action sens
TEXT: project at Princeton was a precursor of the Geographic Information Systems so ubiquitous and foundational to our daily lives, bringing together real-time geographical information and complex data modeling, and constantly recalcul­ ating a projection of the future., LINE: 88, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: project wa precursor geograph inform system ubiquit foundat daili life togeth real time geograph inform complex data model constantli project futur
TEXT:  Whether predicting alternative routes from live traffic patterns or deciphering future sociological and political changes in the population through census-data manage­ ment and feedback, these systems mediate the relationship between the individual and the collective, between us and the environment., LINE: 89, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: whether altern rout live traffic pattern futur sociolog polit chang popul censu data manag feedback system mediat relationship individu collect environ
TEXT:  Similarly, Fuller’s lifelong epistemological pursuit­—his defining and redefining of words and concepts through a process of discursive experimentation, which reached a peak in the language of his patent applications and Synergetics Dictionary—foreshadows our contemporary understanding of innovation as transcending questions of technology to focus instead on issues of intellectual property., LINE: 90, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: similarli fuller lifelong epistemolog pursuit word concept process discurs experiment peak languag patent applic dictionari contemporari understand innov transcend question technolog focu instead issu intellectu properti
TEXT:  Fuller’s geological diagrams run counter to the contemporary disci- plinary emphasis on specialization in architecture, which had already begun to emerge by the time he delivered his Kassler lecture. In his brief for the International Union of Architects’ “World Design Science Decade, 1965–1975,” Fuller warned about the dangers of speciali­zation and pointed to architects as “the last species of professional comprehensivists” capable of facing the., LINE: 91, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller geolog diagram run counter contemporari discu emphasi special architectur alreadi begun emerg time lectur brief intern union architect world design scienc decad fuller danger point architect last speci profession capabl face
TEXT: 27 López-Pérez: introductiontechnological, environmental, and political challenges ahead.32 His models call for a more comprehensive understanding of the contribution that the discipline can make in reshaping our environment— materially, but also socially, politically, and culturally. In “World Man”—and, by example, in all of his creative practices— Fuller urges architects to understand their role in society not only as technical specialists but also as public intellect­uals, uniquely positioned to build alliances with the professional, civic, and cultural spheres in order to influence them all. If Fuller habitually defined himself as a “comprehensive anticipatory design scientist” who championed broad thinking in order to benefit the greatest number, our revisiting of his “World Man” lecture almost half a century after it was delivered challenges us to examine our disciplinary definitions as a way to seize the present and transform the future., LINE: 92, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: environment polit challeng ahead model call comprehens understand contribut disciplin make environ materi also social polit cultur world man exampl creativ practic fuller urg architect understand role societi technic specialist also public intellect uniqu posit build allianc profession civic cultur sphere order influenc fuller habitu defin comprehens anticipatori design scientist broad think order benefit number world man lectur almost half centuri wa challeng examin disciplinari definit way seiz present transform futur
TEXT: Notes1. R. Buckminster Fuller to Dr. Robert Geddes, Bear Island, Maine, 26 August 1966; and R. Buckminster Fuller, “World Man,” typescript of lecture delivered on October 5, 1966. Both documents, reprinted in their entirety in this volume, are held in the Robert Geddes Papers, Princeton University School of Architecture Archive, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. In his letter to Geddes, Fuller recommends that his lecture be “taped, transcribed, and corrected” for eventual publication. All subsequent citations of Fuller are taken from this typescript unless otherwise noted., LINE: 93, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: note fuller bear island august fuller world man typescript lectur document entireti volum paper univers school architectur archiv univers letter fuller lectur correct eventu public subsequ citat fuller taken typescript unless otherwis note
TEXT: 2. “The Dymaxion American,” Time 83, no. 2 (10 January 1964): 48. The issue’s cover illustration features Fuller’s radome, Dymaxion car, tensegrity octahedron, 4-D apartment house, and Dymaxion mobile laboratory alongside his disembodied head, contoured in the shape of a geodesic sphere., LINE: 94, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: time issu cover illustr featur fuller radom car octahedron apart hous mobil laboratori alongsid head shape geodes sphere
TEXT: 3. The Time article maintains that in 1964 Fuller’s domes “covered more square feet of the Earth than any other single kind of shelter.” Ibid.4. Museum of Modern Art, New York, “Visionary Architecture,” press release, September 29, 1960; exhibition, September 29–December 4, 1960., LINE: 95, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: time articl fuller dome cover squar foot earth singl kind shelter ibid museum modern art new york visionari architectur press releas exhibit
TEXT: 5. R. Buckminster Fuller, “Here we have the same tensegrity principles, but instead of being a spherical structure, it is a linear structure. It is a tensegrity mast at New York’s Museum of Modern Art. If you study this you will see independent tetrahedral groups superimposed.” “World Design Science Decade, 1965–1975, Phase, LINE: 96, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller principl instead spheric structur linear structur mast new york museum modern art studi see independ tetrahedr group superimpos world design scienc decad phase
TEXT: 28I, Document 2, The Design Initiative” (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University, 1964), 41.6. Museum of Modern Art, New York, “Arthur Drexler Retires as Director of Department of Architecture and Design at the Museum of Modern Art,” press release, January 1987. See also Three Structures by Buckminster Fuller, Museum of Modern Art, New York, September 22–Winter 1960. For a detailed list of Fuller’s creative output, see Jennie Goldstein, “Selected Contextual Chronology,” in Buckminster Fuller: Starting with the Universe, ed. K. Michael Hays and Dana Ashley Miller (New York: Whitney Museum of American Art and Yale University Press, 2008). For a comprehensive chronology of Fuller’s geodesic prototypes, see the University of San Diego’s Spherical Atlas Research Unit (sphericalatlas.com)., LINE: 97, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: document design initi ill southern univers museum modern art new york director depart architectur design museum modern art press releas see also three structur fuller museum modern art new york winter detail list fuller creativ output see select contextu chronolog fuller start univers hay miller new york museum art yale univers press comprehens chronolog fuller geodes prototyp see univers san spheric atla research unit
TEXT: 7. John McHale, introduction to “Richard Buckminster Fuller,” Architectural Design, July 1961, 290. See also John McHale, R. Buckminster Fuller, Makers of Modern Architecture (New York: George Braziller, 1962)., LINE: 98, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: introduct fuller architectur design see also fuller maker modern architectur new york
TEXT: 8. Fuller, quoted in “Dymaxion American,” 51.9. Hsiao-Yun Chu and Roberto G. Trujillo, eds., introduction to New Views on R. Buckminster Fuller (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2009), 2.10. In an interview Stan Allen conducted with Robert Geddes in preparing this volume, Geddes recalled that although he extended the formal invitation to Fuller, Kenneth Kassler’s widow, Elizabeth Bauer Kassler (1911–98), had been the driving force behind bringing Fuller to Princeton. A former curator, LINE: 99, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller introduct new view fuller univers press interview volum although extend formal invit fuller widow drive forc behind fuller former curat
TEXT: in the Department of Architecture and Design at MoMA, Bauer Kassler maintained a “good relationship” with Arthur Drexler, Fuller’s strong supporter, and likely facilitated contact between the parties. For more on Allen’s conversation with Geddes, see the Postscript contained in this volume., LINE: 100, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: depart architectur design good relationship fuller strong support like contact parti convers see postscript volum
TEXT: 11. Department of Public Relations, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J., “Release: Sunday, November 15, 1953,” press release, November 1953. Robert Geddes Papers.12. For more on the Princeton sphere, see “Discontinuous Compression Sphere, School of Architecture, Princeton University, 1953,” in The Artifacts of R. Buckminster Fuller: A Comprehensive Collection of His Designs and Drawings in Four Volumes (New York: Garland Publishing, 1985), 181–85., LINE: 101, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: depart public relat univers releas press releas paper sphere see discontinu compress sphere school architectur univers artifact fuller comprehens collect design draw four volum new york garland
TEXT: 13. Fuller’s patent describes the tensile- integrity structure as “a strut and a pair of flexible tension slings each connected to an end portion and to a portion intermediate the ends of the strut, and means for connecting said slings respectively to end portions of two other components of like construction.” “Tensile-Integrity Structures,” U.S. Patent No. 3,063,521. Fuller applied for this patent on August 31, 1959; he received it on November 13, 1962, almost a decade after he built the Princeton structure. On Fuller’s patents, see R. Buckminster Fuller, Inventions: The Patented Works of R. Buckminster Fuller (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983)., LINE: 102, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller patent tensil integr structur strut pair flexibl tension sling connect end portion portion intermedi end strut mean said sling respect end portion two compon like construct tensil integr structur patent fuller appli patent august receiv almost decad built structur fuller patent see fuller invent work fuller new york martin press
TEXT: 14. Ibid. Regarding the principle of discontinuous- compression in that project, Fuller later wrote, “We manufactured and assembled a 40 foot tensegrity sphere of 90 struts. A29 López-Pérez: introduction, LINE: 103, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: ibid regard principl discontinu compress project fuller later wrote foot sphere strut introduct
TEXT: snowplow ran into this structure on one side and way around 180 degrees from the point of impact a member bent. The loads were distributed completely symmetrically in all directions from the point of impact until finally they came together again at the other pole. There the forces converged in full concentration as waves develop on spheres.” Fuller, “World Design Science Decade,” 39., LINE: 104, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: snowplow ran structur one side way around degre point impact member bent load distribut complet symmetr direct point impact final came togeth pole forc full concentr wave develop sphere fuller world design scienc decad
TEXT: 15. Fuller, “Tensile-Integrity Structures.”16. Ibid.17. Ibid. For more on his “Tensile-Integrity Structures” patent, see Fuller, Inventions, 179.18. “The Sphere of Ideas,” Princeton Alumni Weekly LIV, no. 10 (November 27, 1953): 8., LINE: 105, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller tensil integr structur ibid ibid tensil integr structur patent see fuller invent sphere idea alumnu weekli
TEXT: 19. Henry McLaughlin III, “Scientist Builds Model Earth in Princeton Lab,” The Daily Princetonian (March 24, 1960): 1. The basic form of a spherical, or “globe,” map stemmed from Fuller’s belief that “as the Earth is a spherical body, so the only true cartographic representation of its true surface must be spherical. All flat surface maps are compromises with truth.” “Dymaxion Map [Cartography Patent],” in Fuller, Inventions, 90., LINE: 106, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: henri scientist build model earth lab daili march basic form spheric globe map stem fuller belief earth spheric bodi true cartograph represent true surfac must spheric flat surfac map compromis truth map cartographi patent fuller invent
TEXT: 20. Fuller, quoted in McLaughlin, “Scientist Builds Model Earth,” 1.21. James Robert Hillier, “What Is the Geoscope,” Geoscope 1960, 4. Robert Geddes Papers. On the Cornell project, see “Twenty-Foot Globe of Wooden Slats, Cornell University, 1952,” The Artifacts of R. Buckminster Fuller, 86. Fuller began a third geoscope, at the University of Minnesota in 1954, which he nicknamed “Minni-Earth.” R. Buckminster Fuller, letter to Brigadier General Harold E. Watson,, LINE: 107, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller scientist build model earth paper project see twenti foot globe wooden slat univers artifact fuller fuller third univers earth fuller letter brigadi gener
TEXT: United States Air Force, 19 April 1955. Robert Geddes Papers.22. Hillier, “What Is the Geoscope,” 4–5.23. “I send you this letter because of your long demonstrated interest and support of my geographical and my structural explorations alike which have now become unexpectedly married in Minni-Earth.” Fuller to Watson, 11., LINE: 108, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: unit state air forc paper send letter long interest support geograph structur explor alik becom unexpectedli marri earth fuller
TEXT: 24. “Princeton Builds a Large Globe Map,” New York Times, April 6, 1960.25. R. Buckminster Fuller, “Geoscope= World Looks at Itself,” entry in Synergetics Dictionary: The Mind of Buckminster Fuller, vol. 2, ed. E. J. Applewhite (New York: Garland, 1986), 154., LINE: 109, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: build larg globe map new york time fuller world look entri dictionari mind fuller vol new york garland
TEXT: 26. Fuller described words as “the first industrial tools”:[I]nherently they involve a plurality of people and are also inherently prior to relayed com- munication and integration of the respective experiences of a plurality of individuals. This is reminiscent of the scriptural account, ‘In the beginning was the word,’ which we may modify to read, ‘In the beginning of industri- alization was the word.’ Crafts are limited to a single person and involve only very local resources and very limited fragments of Earth and time, while industrialization, through the relayed experience of all people—permitted through the individualization of the spoken and written word—involves all experiences of all people everywhere in history., LINE: 110, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller word first industri tool involv plural peopl also inher prior integr respect experi plural individu reminisc scriptur account begin wa word may modifi read begin wa word craft limit singl person involv local resourc limit fragment earth time experi peopl permit spoken written word experi peopl everywher histori
TEXT: R. Buckminster Fuller, “Emergent Humanity: Its Environment and Education,” in R. Buckminster Fuller on Education (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1979), 101–2.3027. For Fuller’s comprehensive attempt to codify the meaning of certain central terms, see the four-volume Synergetics Dictionary. For terms that appear in his Kassler lecture, see the Glossary contained in this volume., LINE: 111, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller emerg human environ educ fuller educ univers press fuller comprehens attempt codifi mean certain central term see four volum dictionari term appear lectur see glossari volum
TEXT: 28. In the “World Man” lecture, Fuller cites advances in telecommuni­cations as signaling the way: “One of the great communication satellites is able, with one-quarter of a ton, to displace the communicating capacity of 75,000 tons of cable under the Atlantic.”, LINE: 112, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: world man lectur fuller cite advanc cation way one great commun satellit abl one quarter ton displac commun capac ton cabl atlant
TEXT: 29. K. Michael Hays, “Fuller’s Geological Engagements with Architecture,” in Buckminster Fuller: Starting with the Universe, 3.30. Ibid., 9.31. Ibid.32. Fuller envisioned an “epochal re- orientation of man” through a refocusing of university education: “[F]rom now on we are going to be giving up specialization and are going to generalization. Everybody will be taught to be a comprehensivist. It is going to come naturally because man is born to be comprehensive. It is a unique biologi- cal characteristic. As he cross-breeds he becomes more comprehensively adaptive. Only in-breeding brings specialized capabil- ity, by breeding-out general adaptability. Architects constitute the last species of professional comprehensivists for they try to put things together while the vast majority, who are specialists, take things apart.” Fuller, “World Design Science Decade,” 98., LINE: 113, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: hay fuller geolog engag architectur fuller start univers ibid ibid fuller epoch orient man univers educ go give special go gener everybodi taught go come natur man born comprehens uniqu cal characterist cross breed becom comprehens adapt breed special breed gener adapt architect constitut last speci profession tri put thing togeth vast major specialist take thing apart fuller world design scienc decad
TEXT: 31 López-Pérez: introductionWorld manoctober 5, 1966R. Buckminsterfuller32333435 fuller: world man3637 fuller: world man3839 fuller: world man4041 fuller: world man4243 fuller: world man4445 fuller: world man, LINE: 114, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man
TEXT: 46Close-up of the Geoscope, 196047 fuller: world man4849 fuller: world man5051 fuller: world man5253 fuller: world man5455 fuller: world man5657 fuller: world mantop: Students assembling the Tensegrity Sphere in front of the Architectural Lab, 1953 bottom: Fully assembled Tensegrity Sphere, LINE: 115, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: close fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world student sphere front architectur lab bottom fulli sphere
TEXT: 5859 fuller: world man6061 fuller: world man6263 fuller: world man6465 fuller: world man6667 fuller: world man6869 fuller: world man7071 fuller: world man72top and bottom: Geoscope inside in the Architectural Lab, 1960, LINE: 116, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man top bottom insid architectur lab
TEXT: 73 fuller: world man7475 fuller: world man7677 fuller: world man7879 fuller: world man8081 fuller: world man8283 fuller: world manClose-up of the Geoscope inside the Architectural Lab, 19608485 fuller: world man, LINE: 117, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man fuller world insid architectur lab fuller world man
TEXT: 8687 fuller: world man8889 fuller: world man9091 fuller: world man92top: Geoscope inside the Architectural Lab, 1960 bottom: Students with models outside the Architectural Lab93 fuller: world man9495 fuller: world man, LINE: 118, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller world man fuller world man fuller world man top insid architectur lab bottom student model outsid architectur lab fuller world man fuller world man
TEXT: 9697 fuller: world man9899 fuller: world man100101 fuller: world manGlossaryCompiled by DanielLópez-Pérez102For R. Buckminster Fuller, words and concepts were intimately related. “[T]he numbers of the words in the dictionary grow,” he asserts in his “World Man” lecture, “because we have more aspects of subjects to consider.” Fuller saw language as an invaluable resource—as a tool to be used not only for sharing ideas with others but also for developing ideas. Language was not an end in itself but rather a discursive process, through which he created and explored new concepts. By recombining elements of existing words Fuller coined many new ones, including “ephemeralization” (the nominal form of the verbed noun “ephemeral”), which refers to the idea of “progressively doing more with less,” and “dymaxion” (an adjective formed from “dynamic” and “maximum”), which he defines as “maximum output with minimum input.”, LINE: 119, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller world man fuller world man fuller world fuller word concept intim relat number word dictionari grow world man lectur aspect subject consid fuller saw languag invalu resourc tool use idea also idea languag wa end rather discurs process new concept element word fuller mani new one nomin form noun ephemer idea progress less adject form dynam maximum maximum output minimum input
TEXT: The attempt to codify his core terms plays a central role in a series of books Fuller wrote in collaboration with editor E. J. Applewhite beginning in the 1970s. Sharing the word “synergetics” in their titles, the works aimed at providing a comprehensive exposition of Fuller’s radical epistemological cosmos with its landscape of unfamiliar models and metaphors. In preparing the Synergetics volumes, Fuller sent Applewhite copies of all the books, articles, lectures, manuscripts, and letters he had written, together with notebooks, drawings, blueprints, and press clippings documenting his work. He also sent him two trunks full of notes he had collected for the project, dating as far back as the 1940s., LINE: 120, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: attempt codifi core term play central role seri book fuller wrote collabor editor begin word titl work provid comprehens exposit fuller radic epistemolog cosmo landscap unfamiliar model metaphor volum fuller sent copi book articl lectur manuscript letter written togeth notebook draw blueprint press clip work also sent two trunk full note collect project date far back
TEXT: “Synergetics shows us how we may measure our experiences geomet­ rically and topologically and how we may employ geometry and topology to coordinate all information regarding our experiences, both metaphy­s­ ical and physical. Information can be either conceptually metaphysical or quantitatively special case physical experiencing, or it can be both. The quantized physical case is entropic, while the metaphysical generalized conceptioning induced by the generalized content of the information is syntropic. The resulting mind-appreciated syntropy evolves to antici­ patorily terminate the entropically accelerated disorder.”, LINE: 121, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: show may measur experi may employ geometri topolog inform regard experi physic inform either conceptu metaphys quantit special case physic physic case metaphys gener induc gener content inform syntrop result mind syntropi termin acceler disord
TEXT: —R. Buckminster Fuller, Synergetics 2, 1979103Synergetics: Explorations in the Geometry of Thinking was published in 1975. Synergetics 2, which amplified and amended that volume, appeared in 1979. A third and final book, published in 1986 under the title Synergetics Dictionary: The Mind of Buckminster Fuller, was the culmination of the effort to summarize Fuller’s thinking, largely by providing definitions of the terms that had become part of his unique lexicon., LINE: 122, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller explor geometri think wa volum third final book titl dictionari mind fuller wa culmin effort summar fuller think larg provid definit term becom part uniqu lexicon
TEXT:  Completed posthumously, the dictionary reproduces in four monumental volumes the raw materials that Applewhite created while working with Fuller on the two previous books: an exhaustively cross-referenced, alphabetically coded, first-word index of his topical concepts., LINE: 123, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: posthum dictionari four monument volum raw materi work fuller two previou book exhaust cross alphabet first word index topic concept
TEXT:  Typed note cards, each containing a concept, its definition, and (somewhat cryptic) citations from the literature in which the concept appeared, were reproduced in facsimile form, some with handwritten corrections by Fuller as he worked to establish a definitive set of terms., LINE: 124, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: note card concept definit somewhat cryptic citat literatur concept facsimil form correct fuller work establish definit set term
TEXT: ., LINE: 125, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: “Neither Bucky nor I realized it at the time, but as all those files were compiled they seemed to manifest a sort of self-organizing character, and we ended up creating something approaching a new art form.”, LINE: 126, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: neither bucki time file manifest sort self charact end someth approach new art form
TEXT: —E. J. Applewhite, “Rationale for the Dictionary,” Synergetics Dictionary, vol. 1, 1986For Fuller, the Synergetics project aimed to “measure” all human experience and “coordinate” it into a pattern of words., LINE: 127, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: rational dictionari dictionari vol fuller project measur human experi pattern word
TEXT:  Applewhite describes that discur­ sive pattern in the introduction to the Synergetics Dictionary as “a kind of poetic combination of feeling and abstraction—physical sensations merging into metaphysical patterns., LINE: 128, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: pattern introduct dictionari kind poetic combin feel abstract physic sensat metaphys pattern
TEXT: ” On the one hand, a set of diverging lines reveals physical “experiencing”—our increase in understanding of the physical world through the gathering of more and more quantifiable data—as “entropic,” chaotic, and ever expanding., LINE: 129, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: one hand set diverg line physic increas understand physic world gather quantifi data chaotic ever expand
TEXT:  On the other hand, a set of converging lines shows metaphysical “conceptioning”—our search for conceptual order within the expansive entropy of the physical world—as “syntropic,” increas­ ingly organized and orderly., LINE: 130, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: hand set converg line show metaphys search conceptu order within expans entropi physic world syntrop organ orderli
TEXT:  If Fuller’s incessant investigation of the physical world strove to discover nature’s rules, his conceptual ordering tried to “anticipatorily terminate” that world’s “accelerated disorder.” The physical and conceptual are brought together into what Fuller and Applewhite describe., LINE: 131, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller incess investig physic world strove discov natur rule conceptu tri anticipatorili termin world acceler disord physic conceptu brought togeth fuller describ
TEXT: 104as an “epistemography of generalization,” an endlessly shifting topography propelled by the interplay of all human thinking and experiencing.The glossary of terms included in this volume illustrates Fuller’s unique and extraordinary exploration of language as it relates to his Kassler lecture, delivered at the Princeton School of Architecture in 1966 and reprinted here in its entirety., LINE: 132, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: gener endlessli shift topographi interplay human think glossari term includ volum fuller uniqu extraordinari explor languag lectur school architectur entireti
TEXT:  The glossary lists a number of key terms, accompanied by surrounding text from the body of the lecture (referenced by page number in the original “World Man” typescript). Brief editorial notes explicate the term’s underlying concepts and contextualize it within the broad network of Fuller’s ideas., LINE: 133, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: glossari list number key term surround text bodi lectur page number origin world man typescript brief editori note explic term underli concept within broad network fuller idea
TEXT:  Interspersed with the terms are reproductions of the original drawings Fuller submitted for the patent applications which formed the basis of the two physical models built at Princeton: the “Cartography” patent, filed January 29, 1946; and the “Tensile-Integrity Structures” patent, filed November 13, 1962., LINE: 134, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: term reproduct origin draw fuller patent applic form basi two physic model built cartographi patent tensil integr structur patent
TEXT:  Excerpts from Fuller’s Synergetics volumes (identified by title, year, volume, and page or section number) are also included, as are cross-references to other texts, which provide additional literary context., LINE: 135, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: excerpt fuller volum titl year volum page section number also includ cross refer text provid addit literari context
TEXT:  What becomes apparent in comparing the many uses of these terms over the course of his long career is that, despite sincere efforts, Fuller’s terminol- ogy never becomes fixed or static. Iterative and evolving, like his models of nature’s laws, his definitions move and extend from one area of relevance to another; from the scale of the human body, for example, to the scale of the universe., LINE: 136, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: becom appar mani us term cours long career despit sincer effort fuller never becom fix static iter like model natur law definit move extend one area relev anoth scale human bodi exampl scale univers
TEXT:  Taken together and read in the context of the “World Man” lecture, the terms and their definitions provide an abstract but suggestive outline of Fuller’s “geometry of thinking.”., LINE: 137, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: taken togeth read context world man lectur term definit provid abstract suggest outlin fuller geometri think
TEXT: 105 López-Pérez: glossary1930 1950 19401. Stockade: Building Structure (1927)2. Stockade: Pneumatic Forming Process (1927)3. 4-D House (1928)4. Dymaxion Car (1937)5. Dymaxion Bathroom (1940)6. Dymaxion Deployment Unit (Sheet) (1944), LINE: 138, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: glossari stockad build structur stockad pneumat form process hous car bathroom deploy unit sheet
TEXT: 7. Dymaxion Deployment Unit Frame (1944)8. Dymaxion Map (1946)9. Dymaxion House (Wichita) (1946)10. Geodesic Dome (1954)This diagram plots the introduction of key terms used by Fuller in his “World Man” lecture along a chronological axis, based on bibliographic references provided by Applewhite in his Synergetics Dictionary: The Mind of Buckminster Fuller (1986). Interspersed within this chronol- ogy are a variety of Fuller’s inventions, numbered as they appeared in Inventions: The Patented Works of R. Buckminster Fuller (1983)., LINE: 139, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: deploy unit frame map hous geodes dome diagram plot introduct key term use fuller world man lectur along chronolog axi base bibliograph refer provid dictionari mind fuller within varieti fuller invent invent work fuller
TEXT: 1061960 1970 198011. Paperboard Dome (1959)12. Plydome (1959)13. Catenary (Geodesic Tent) (1959)19. Laminar Dome (1965)20. Octa Spinner (1965)21. Star Tensegrity (Octahedra Truss) (1967)14. Octet Truss (1961), LINE: 140, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: paperboard dome catenari geodes tent laminar dome spinner star octahedron truss octet truss
TEXT: 15. Tensegrity (1962)16. Submarisle (Undersea Island) (1963)17. Aspension (Geodesic Structures) (1964)18. Monohex (Geodesic Structures) (1965)22. Rowing Needles (Rowing Craft) (1970)23. Hexa-Pent (1974), LINE: 141, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: undersea island geodes structur geodes structur row needl row craft hexa pent
TEXT: 24. Floatable Breakwater (1975)25. Non-Symmetrical Tensegrity (1975)26. Floating Breakwater (1979)27. Tensegrity Truss (1980)28. Hanging Storage Unit (1983)AutomationLaw of Conservation of EnergyPrime Design, LINE: 142, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: floatabl breakwat non symmetr float breakwat truss hang storag unit conserv design
TEXT: Antientropic EffectivenessForward RegenerationMetaphysical and PhysicalSystemTheory of FunctionUniverseWealthTotal Challenge107 López-Pérez: glossaryantientropic effectiveness.“[T]he antientropic effectiveness that is inherent in the brain and in the intellect is predicated upon experience. We have to have experiences where we make mistakes. As a child we have to find out about gravity; we have to pull things....[T]here must be a number of experiences before we can begin to gain a pattern and many of the special cases experiences, before we begin to gen- eralize and evolve and deduce principles that are operative.” —“World Man,” 1966, pp. 42–43, LINE: 143, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: challeng effect effect inher brain intellect upon experi experi make mistak child find graviti pull thing must number experi begin gain pattern mani special case experi begin gen evolv deduc principl oper world man
TEXT: In considering the relationship between physi- cal and metaphysical phenomena, Fuller draws a distinction between the “brain” and the “mind.” The brain coordinates all of the infor- mation given to us by our senses (smell, touch, sound, et cetera), whereas the mind reflects intuitively upon the implications of that infor- mation. For Fuller, “design” emanates from the search for insights gleaned from observing the physical world and its “special case expe- riences.” The patterns that emerge are then abstracted into generalized principles., LINE: 144, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: consid relationship cal metaphys phenomenon fuller draw distinct brain mind brain given smell touch sound wherea mind intuit upon implic fuller design search insight observ physic world special case pattern emerg abstract gener principl
TEXT: The process of translating the physical into the metaphysical can also operate in the reverse. “Physical projections” can result from con- ceptual patterns, the presence of which sub- consciously affects human behavior. Potential lies in our capacity to consolidate abstract concepts based on the observation of physical phenomena into generalized principles and, in turn, translate these into physical projec- tions that alter our relationship to our envi- ronment in beneficial ways. Fuller calls our capacity to carry out this feedback process of discovery and translation our “antientropic effectiveness.”, LINE: 145, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: process physic metaphys also oper revers physic project result con pattern presenc sub conscious affect human behavior potenti lie capac consolid abstract concept base observ physic phenomenon gener principl turn translat physic alter relationship benefici way fuller call capac carri feedback process discoveri translat effect
TEXT: “Antientropic Ordering Principles: I think theantientropic ordering principles are both subconsciously and consciously devel- oped by humans as conventions of under- standing of, for instance, how we can prosper without getting into trouble. ‘The Law and the Citizen’ relates to this consciousness. Laws are conventions, working agreements, often different from the experimentally discov- ered principles governing physical Universe behaviors. There is usually a deal of differ- ence between yesterday’s erroneous assump- tions and today’s scientific findings.” —Law, May 1965; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 1, p. 71, LINE: 146, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: principl think principl subconsci conscious human convent stand instanc prosper without get troubl law citizen conscious law convent work agreement often differ experiment principl govern physic univers behavior usual deal differ yesterday erron today scientif find law may dictionari vol
TEXT: 108automation.“I just have to remind you, as I continually remind myself, that the word ‘automation’ is not something really new. It is a description of a very old process....[Y]ou are 99% auto- mated...you don’t know what you are doing with the supper that you ate tonight....I have discovered...that I know very, very little, and found that I am certainly well over 99% sub- consciously operative....[A] quadrillion times the quadrillion atoms in coordinate operation in our brains, and we have nothing to do with their extraordinary success in a conscious way, so that when I look on man in this way, I am surprised at the very little, tiny bit of area of his total being and his coordination and his partic- ipation with the rest of life around the Earth.” —“World Man,” 1966, pp. 40–41, LINE: 147, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: remind continu remind word someth realli new descript old process auto know supper ate tonight discov know littl found certainli well sub conscious oper quadrillion time quadrillion atom oper brain noth extraordinari success consciou way look man way littl tini bit area total rest life around earth world man
TEXT: For Fuller, “automation” is a process that takes place in nature on a number of scales: at the scale of the body and its metabolic balances, for example, and at the scale of the planet and its broader cosmic balance. It is also a process central to energy and resource consumption with respect to manufacturing and produc- tion. Fuller develops the term in his 1962 text “Education Automation.” There he argues that education is at the center of society’s transition away from mechanized work and toward an “automation” that will produce a more regen- erative and sustainable “industrial equation.” “[T]he more educated our population,” Fuller maintains, “the more effective it becomes as an integral of regenerative consumer individuals.”, LINE: 148, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller process take place natur number scale scale bodi metabol balanc exampl scale planet cosmic balanc also process central energi resourc consumpt respect fuller term text educ educ center societi transit away work toward produc sustain industri equat educ popul fuller effect becom integr regen consum individu
TEXT: “Automation: We hear a great deal about auto-mation as something very threatening... something new. I’m going to try to define auto-mation. By automation I would mean any regulatory pattern or control operative independent of man’s controlling it: that would, LINE: 149, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: hear great deal auto someth threaten someth new go tri defin auto would mean regulatori pattern control oper independ man would
TEXT: be automated. I’ll point out to you that the orbiting about Earth and all the pulsing of the Sun—this is all automated. I point out that none of you know what you’re doing with your lunch right now—this is all automated. You’re not consciously saying, ‘I’m going to send this, LINE: 150, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: point earth sun point none know lunch right conscious say go send
TEXT: off to make hair for tomorrow, and I’m going to have curly hair,’ or whatever it is. You haven’t the slightest idea why you were born at seven pounds, and why you went to 170, and why you stopped. People learned accidentally that they pushed some buttons and made babies, but all the rest is automated. They haven’t the slightest idea why. I point out to you that we have never had anything but automation.” —World Game at NY Studio School, 12 June–July 1969; Saturn Film transcript,, LINE: 151, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: make hair tomorrow go curli hair whatev idea born seven pound went stop peopl learn accident button made babi rest idea point never anyth world game studio school june film transcript
TEXT: Sound 1, Reel 1, pp. 83–84; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 1, p. 117109 López-Pérez: glossaryforward regeneration.“From this point on it is man’s intellect that is of advantage. His observation, then, of the principles operative in the universe, his learn- ing new discovery patterns of energy which are operative and shunting them to the ends of the levers to do the work, so I see that the organized capability to deal with our for-, LINE: 152, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: sound reel dictionari vol regener point man intellect advantag observ principl oper univers learn ing new discoveri pattern energi oper shunt end lever work see organ capabl deal
TEXT: ward regeneration is then, if that is wealth, then it consists not only of the energy which is manipulated, but it consists of the intellect which observes and develops....And so [humans] are able to use the generalized principles to their increasing advantage in their metabolic regeneration.” —“World Man,” 1966, p. 51, LINE: 153, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: ward regener wealth energi intellect human abl use gener principl increas advantag metabol regener world man
TEXT: The term “regeneration” was intrinsic to Fuller’s “wealth,” a concept that went well beyond an abundance of physical resources. Technology constantly improves the effi- ciency and precision with which materials are transformed through modern processes of manufacture. No longer conceived as a zero-sum game that unites consumption with the depletion of material resources, Fuller’s notion emphasizes the system’s capacity for regeneration. “Forward” or “metabolic” regeneration implies devising more efficient processes and preventive strategies in the use of material resources, as well as a more universal distribution of these resources. If “wealth” translates into the organized capacity to deal efficiently with resources, then “forward regeneration” signals our organized capacity to find alternative ways of managing and preserving resources for future generations., LINE: 154, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: term regener wa intrins fuller wealth concept went well beyond abund physic resourc technolog constantli precis materi modern process manufactur longer zero sum game consumpt deplet materi resourc fuller notion system capac regener forward metabol regener effici process prevent strategi use materi resourc well univers distribut resourc wealth organ capac deal effici resourc forward regener signal organ capac find altern way resourc futur gener
TEXT: “Regenerative: Regenerative means local energy-pattern conservation.” —Synergetics text at sec. 600.04, 3 October 1972; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 3, p. 495110law of conservation of energy., LINE: 155, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: regen regen mean local energi pattern conserv text sec dictionari vol law conserv energi
TEXT: “[It was] in the early part...of this century that scientists began to make experiments spe- cifically with entropy, and they discovered whenever systems lost energy...it could only dissociate here by joining there, and energies were 100% accountable. Therefore they began to feel it was a fallacy to think of the ener- gies escaping from the universe....[They] felt constrained to formulate a new fundamental, LINE: 156, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: wa earli part centuri scientist make experi entropi discov whenev system lost energi could dissoci join energi account therefor feel wa fallaci think univers felt constrain formul new fundament
TEXT: concept which they call the law of conser-vation of energy, which said no energy could be created or no energy could be lost. Energy, then was finite, and we have then, along with the many experiments like those of the speed of light and the other types of obser- vation, experiments of inspired people like Einstein, Plant, and others. We have developing, then an entirely new way of looking at energy.” —“World Man,” 1966, pp. 18–19, LINE: 157, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: concept call law energi said energi could energi could lost energi wa finit along mani experi like speed light type experi inspir peopl like plant entir new way look energi world man
TEXT: 111 López-Pérez: glossaryIn describing the law of conservation of energy, where the total amount of energy in a system remains constant over time, Fuller makes reference to Einstein’s theory of relativ- ity, in which energy has an equivalent mass and mass has an equivalent energy. After Einstein, the “law of conservation of energy” could be understood as a “law of conservation of mass- energy,” a revision of the nineteenth-century laws of physics in which energy was somehow lost as it was transferred from one system to another. Fuller highlighted this twentieth- century discovery as a “new cosmological concept of an inexhaustible” universe, where energy can be understood as “associative as matter” and “disassociative as radiation.”, LINE: 158, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: law conserv energi total amount energi system remain constant time fuller make refer theori energi ha equival mass mass ha equival energi law conserv energi could understood law conserv mass energi revis nineteenth centuri law physic energi wa somehow lost wa transfer one system anoth fuller twentieth centuri discoveri new cosmolog concept inexhaust univers energi understood associ matter radiat
TEXT: “Physicists had predicated their grand strate- gies upon the experience of trying to make something like a perpetual motion machine. They found that all local machines always had friction, therefore energies were always going out of the system. They call that entropy: local systems were always losing energy to the rest of the universe. When the physicist began to look at their total experience instead of at just one of their experiences, they found that while the energy may escape from one system, it does not go out of the universe. It could only disassociate in one place by associating in another place. They found that this experimen- tally true, and finally, by the mid-19th century, they dared to develop what they called the, LINE: 159, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: physicist grand upon experi tri make someth like perpetu motion machin found local machin alway friction therefor energi alway go system call entropi local system alway lose energi rest univers physicist look total experi instead one experi found energi may escap one system doe univers could disassoci one place anoth place found talli true final mid centuri develop
TEXT: Law of Conservation of Energy, which said that no energy could be created and no energy could be lost. Energy is finite. Physical universe is finite. Physical Universe is just as finite as the triangle of 180 degrees.” —Synergetics, 1975, sec. 116.00, LINE: 160, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: law conserv energi said energi could energi could lost energi finit physic univers finit physic univers finit triangl degre sec
TEXT: “Energy: Scientists experimenting with entropy discovered that while energy left one local system after another, it always did so only by joining other local systems. The scien- tists found that energy was always 100 per- cent accountable. Therefore, they had to elucidate a new and fundamental scientific law which they called ‘law of conserva-, LINE: 161, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: energi scientist entropi discov energi left one local system anoth alway join local system found energi wa alway per cent account therefor elucid new fundament scientif law law
TEXT: tion of energy’ which stated that energy could be neither created nor lost....Therefore we emerged scientifically in the early days of the 20th century into an entirely new cos- mological concept of an inexhaustible, ergo finite (physical) Universe consisting entirely of energy—energy associative as matter, and energy disassociative as radiation, and both intertransformable.” —NASA Speech, June 1966, p. 25; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 1, p. 616, LINE: 162, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: energi state energi could neither lost therefor scientif earli day centuri entir new concept inexhaust finit physic univers entir energi energi associ matter energi radiat speech june dictionari vol
TEXT: 112metaphysical and physical.“I find that the metaphysical seems to be the balance of the physical, that metaphysi-cal isn’t just the name of a club of people who did not belong to the exact sciences, but metaphysical is a phenomenon of the universe that is in extraordinary balance and comprehensive to the physical expanding, increasing entropic, disorderly, metaphysi-, LINE: 163, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: metaphys physic find metaphys balanc physic cal name club peopl belong exact scienc metaphys phenomenon univers extraordinari balanc comprehens physic expand increas disorderli
TEXT: cal, continually contracting and increasingly more orderly until it comes to the exquisite- ness of a single unity which has a fundamental complementary of functions, but inherently includes those functions in one word.” —“World Man,” 1966, p. 33, LINE: 164, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: cal continu increasingli orderli come exquisit ness singl uniti ha fundament complementari function inher function one word world man
TEXT: Fuller often speaks of the world in terms of dual- ities. Here he juxtaposes the terms “physical” and “metaphysical” as a way to describe what he sees as two parallel universes. On the one hand, the “physical” universe transcends conceptual definition and is thus “entropic” or “increasingly diffuse and disorderly.” Conversely, the “meta- physical” is defined by conceptual under­ standing and is “antientropic,” or inherently tending toward order. Using this duality, Fuller argues that it is in the balance between the “physical,” as the potential to find a better “regeneration” for Earth’s resources, and the “metaphysical,” as the “know-how” of better managing them, where the possibility of a better future lies., LINE: 165, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller often world term dual term physic metaphys way describ see two parallel univers one hand physic univers conceptu definit thu increasingli diffus disorderli convers meta physic defin conceptu stand inher tend toward order dualiti fuller balanc physic potenti find better regener earth resourc metaphys know better possibl better futur lie
TEXT: 113 López-Pérez: glossary“The greatest of all the faculties is the ability of the imagination to formulate conceptual- ity. Conceptuality is subjective; realization is objective. Conceptuality is metaphysical and weightless; reality is physical.” —Synergetics, 1975, sec. 501.01, LINE: 166, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: glossari faculti abil imagin formul conceptu conceptu subject realiz object conceptu metaphys weightless realiti physic sec
TEXT: “Metaphysical and Physical: For the support of life on our planet...you get down to two things: metaphysical and physical. So there’s the physical regeneration and themetaphysical know-how of how to employ all the resources, all the patterns, that are oper- ating in Universe....These are the criteria of what you need to keep a human being going.” —World Game: Grand Strategy, 2 June 1974; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 2, p. 619, LINE: 167, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: metaphys physic support life planet get two thing metaphys physic physic regener know employ resourc pattern univers criterion need keep human go world game grand strategi june dictionari vol
TEXT: prime designer.“An inventor is a prime designer in that nobody tells him to do that designing. So I am hoping the inventor in everyone, and par- ticularly in the university world...will again re-attack the problem of living on our energy incomes and the enormous tidal energies that are available.” —“World Man,” 1966, p. 45, LINE: 168, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: prime design inventor prime design nobodi tell design inventor everyon par univers world attack problem live energi incom enorm tidal energi avail world man
TEXT: The process of design and invention synthe- sizes issues of technological efficiency and prototyping with the accommodation of what Fuller describes as “ever more inclusive, efficient, and in every way more humanly pleasing performances.” Inventions have the potential to transcend technical function to include a civic and political dimension that Fuller describes in his lecture as the “social accounting of wealth.”, LINE: 169, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: process design invent size issu technolog effici accommod fuller ever inclus effici everi way humanli pleas perform invent potenti transcend technic function includ civic polit dimens fuller lectur social account wealth
TEXT: 114“Prime Design: See Artist-scientist, May 1960” —Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 3, p. 365“Design: Our overall use of our energy, our design, is very bad....” —Energy Slave (3), June–July 1969; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 1, p. 472, LINE: 170, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: prime design see artist scientist may dictionari vol design overal use energi design bad energi slave june dictionari vol
TEXT: “Design: “The word design is used in contra- diction to random happenstance. Design is intellectually deliberate. Design means that all the components of the composition are inter­considerately arranged; i., LINE: 171, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: design word design use contra diction random happenst design intellectu deliber design mean compon composit inter consider
TEXT: e., the compo- nent behaviors, proclivities, and mathematical integrities are interaccommodatively arranged. Ergo, the family of thus-far-discovered scien- tifically generalized principles which are omniinteraccommodative and omniconcurrent inherently constitute a design, an eternal cos- mic design whose eternal interrelationships are expressible only in abstract mathematical terms., LINE: 172, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: compo behavior procliv mathemat integr famili thu far discov gener principl inher constitut design etern design whose etern express abstract mathemat term
TEXT:  Being exclusively mathematical, they are inherently metaphysical, weightless, abstractions, which metaphysics can only be conceived of and dealt with by intellect, and being thus far apparently eternal and discover- able only by human intellect, they altogether manifest an a priori cosmic intellect of abso- lute integrity., LINE: 173, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: exclus mathemat inher metaphys weightless abstract metaphys dealt intellect thu far appar etern discov abl human intellect altogeth manifest cosmic intellect lute integr
TEXT: ” —Introduction to H. Kenner’s “Geodesic Math,” 8 September 1975, p. 10; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 1, p. 470., LINE: 174, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: introduct kenner geodes math dictionari vol
TEXT: system.“[A] system is the first subdivision of the universe, and a system subdivides all of the universe, and all of the universe is outside the system and all is inside that system. Shirley Morgan can be a system; the Earth can be a system, because clearly there is that which is interior and that which is exterior to it. Some part of the universe has to be invested in the system itself to differentiate what is in or outside at a given moment. That is what I mean by a system.” —“World Man,” 1966, p. 28, LINE: 175, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: system system first subdivis univers system univers univers outsid system insid system morgan system earth system clearli interior exterior part univers ha system differenti outsid given moment mean system world man
TEXT: Fuller defines “system” as the first order of dif- ference and subdivision among concepts and divides the Universe into “systems,” which in themselves have an “interior” and an “exte- rior” whose interrelationships are described as, LINE: 176, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller system first order subdivis among concept divid univers system interior whose
TEXT: 115 López-Pérez: glossarya “tracery” of lines. Following from Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s General System Theory, he thought a system is any self-regulating whole capable of self-correcting through a process of feedback. Fuller used Bertalanffy’s theory as a way to posit a more interactive relation- ship between an organism and its environ- ment. In his Kassler lecture, Fuller refers to the physiology of the human body as a self- regulating system; in other works, he cites local or global ecosystems., LINE: 177, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: traceri line follow gener system theori thought system self whole capabl self correct process feedback fuller use theori way posit interact relat ship organ environ lectur fuller physiolog human bodi self system work cite local global ecosystem
TEXT: “A system is the first division of the Universe. It divides all of the Universe into six parts: first, all of the universal events occurring geo- metrically outside the system; second, all of the universal events occurring geometri- cally inside the system; third, all of the uni- versal events occurring nonsimultaneously, remotely, and unrelatedly prior to the system events; fourth, the Universe events occurring nonsimultaneously, remotely, and unrelat- edly prior to the system events; fifth, all the geometrically arrayed set of events constitut- ing the system itself; and sixth, all of the Universe events occurring synchronously and or coincidentally to and with the systematic set of events uniquely considered.” —Synergetics, sec. 400.011, 1975, LINE: 178, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: system first divis univers divid univers six part first univers event geo metric outsid system second univers event insid system third versal event remot prior system event fourth univers event remot prior system event fifth geometr set event ing system sixth univers event synchron coincident systemat set event uniqu consid sec
TEXT: “System: The Local environment is a system. A line is always formed by an alteration of the local environment by another system. ‘Lines’ are the pattern of consequence of onesystem altering another system, either by adding to it, or by taking away from it. The event leaves some kind of tracery.” —Line, 25 April 1971; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 4, p. 114, LINE: 179, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: system local environ system line alway form alter local environ anoth system line pattern consequ anoth system either take away event leaf kind traceri line dictionari vol
TEXT: theory of function.“A function exists only by virtue of the always and only coexistence of other functions. Then from our theory of function we might further go and have phenomenon which we would speak about as relativity.” —“World Man,” 1966, p. 30, LINE: 180, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: theori function function virtu alway coexist function theori function might phenomenon would speak rel world man
TEXT: The “theory of function” can be understood as the relationship that emerges between differ- ent networks within a self-regulating system. Fuller named the behavior of whole systems “synergy” and defined it in a letter to the edi- tor (John McHale) published in Architectural Design in July 1961 as follows: “Synergy is the unique behavior of whole systems unpre- dicted by behavior of their respective subsys- tems’ events.”, LINE: 181, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: theori function understood relationship differ network within self system fuller behavior whole system synergi defin letter tor architectur design synergi uniqu behavior whole system behavior respect event
TEXT: 116“The theory of functions holds for Universe itself. Universe consists at mini- mum of both the metaphysical and the physi- cal. The inherent, uniquely differentiatable, but constantly interproportional twoness of physical Universe was embraced in Einstein’s one-word metaphysical concept, ‘relativity,’ and in a more specific and experimentally demonstrable way in the physicist’s concept of complementarity.” —Synergetics 2, 1979, sec. 326.25, LINE: 182, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: theori function hold univers univers mum metaphys cal inher uniqu constantli twoness physic univers wa one word metaphys concept rel specif experiment demonstr way physicist concept sec
TEXT: “Theory of Functions: A system is something that divides the Universe into all that is inside the system as distinct from all that is outside of it. Your body is such a system. So is a tomato can. So is the Earth., LINE: 183, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: theori function system someth divid univers insid system distinct outsid bodi system tomato earth
TEXT:  Viewed from inside, a system is concave; viewed from outside, it is convex. As the sums of the angles add up, the total is always less degrees than a plane. In order to take a flat piece of paper and make it into any kind of polyhedron, regular or irregular, you are going to have keep taking out angles to bring it back to itself until, finally, it is a poly- hedron., LINE: 184, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: insid system concav outsid convex sum angl add total alway less degre plane order take flat piec paper make kind polyhedron regular irregular go keep take angl bring back final poli
TEXT:  You always come into that concavity and convexity eventually. When energy radiation impinges on concavity, the radiation converges; energy impinging on convexity diverges the radiation. So concave and convex always and only coexist., LINE: 185, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: alway come concav convex eventu energi radiat concav radiat energi convex radiat concav convex alway coexist
TEXT:  I give you three kinds of always- and-only coexisting functions: tension and compression, concave and convex, and proton and neutron. Now we can develop something we call theory of functions where we have x and y as the two covariables and have the x standing for tension, convex, and proton and y standing for compression, concave, neutron., LINE: 186, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: give three kind alway function tension compress concav convex proton neutron develop someth call theori function two stand tension convex proton stand compress concav neutron
TEXT: ” —Franklin Lecture, Auburn,., LINE: 187, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: franklin lectur auburn
TEXT: Alabama, 1970, p. 83; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 2, p. 100total challenge.“I became interested as an inventor in always observing this kind of total challenge with respect to anything that I might try to find as permitted in the principles operative in the universe that would give man advantage in regenerating himself on the surface of the Earth, while serving his function of the great- est and most exquisite phase of antientropy.” —“World Man,” 1966, p. 38, LINE: 188, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: dictionari vol total challeng interest inventor alway observ kind total challeng respect anyth might tri find permit principl oper univers would give man advantag surfac earth serv function great exquisit phase world man
TEXT: Informed from an early age by a profound sense of “planetary consciousness,” Fuller saw his role as inventor as improving human understanding of the planet and meeting the environmental challenges it then faced. In his famous “Introduction, Guinea Pig B,” pub- lished in 1983 (the year of his death), Fuller reflects on this ambitious goal: “I saw that there was nothing to stop me from thinking, LINE: 189, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: inform earli age profound sens planetari conscious fuller saw role inventor improv human understand planet meet environment challeng face famou introduct guinea pig pub year death fuller ambiti goal saw wa noth stop think
TEXT: 117 López-Pérez: glossaryabout our total planet Earth and thinking realistically about how to operate it on an enduring sustainable basis as the magnifi- cent human-passengered spaceship that it is.” Extending his metaphor of Earth as spaceship, he urges his readers to think “about the total physical resources we have now discovered aboard our ship and about how to use the total cumulative know-how to make this ship work for everybody.” Once met, the total challenge posed by Earth would give way to “the omni- physically successful, spontaneous self-inte- gration of all of humanity” into what he called a “one-town world.”, LINE: 190, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: total planet earth think realist oper endur sustain basi cent human spaceship extend metaphor earth spaceship urg reader think total physic resourc discov aboard ship use total cumul know make ship work everybodi met total challeng earth would give way physic success spontan self human one town world
TEXT: universe.“By ‘universe’ I mean the aggregate of all of humanity’s consciously-apprehended and communicated experiences.” —“World Man,” 1966, p. 16Fuller employs the term “Universe” as a unify- ing concept. Often capitalized and preceded by neither definite nor indefinite article, the word suggests an external perspective from which to test assumptions regarding our role on Earth and Earth’s relationship to the cosmos. Borrowing from both the physical sciences and natural philosophy, Fuller used the term to refer to both a physical model and a philosoph- ical concept of the world in its totality., LINE: 191, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: univers univers mean aggreg human conscious experi world man fuller employ term univers unifi ing concept often neither definit indefinit articl word extern perspect test assumpt regard role earth earth relationship cosmo borrow physic scienc natur philosophi fuller use term refer physic model philosoph concept world total
TEXT: “Universe is the comprehensive, histori- cally synchronous, integral-aggregate system embracing all the separate integral-aggregate systems of all men’s consciously appre- hended and communicated (to self or others) nonsimultaneous, nonidentical, but always complementary and only partially overlap- ping, macro-micro, always-and-everywhere, omnitransforming, physical and metaphysical, weighable and unweighable event sequences., LINE: 192, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: univers comprehens synchron integr aggreg system embrac separ integr aggreg system men conscious self nonident alway complementari partial overlap ping macro micro alway everywher physic metaphys weighabl unweigh event sequenc
TEXT: Universe is a dynamically synchronous sce- nario that is unitarily nonconceptual as of any one moment, yet as an aggregate of finites is sum-totally finite.” —Synergetics, 1975, sec. 303.00“Universe: Universe is the integral of all meta­physical and physical phenomena.” —Equation of Intellect (A), 17 June 1975, p. 17; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 4, p. 365, LINE: 193, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: univers dynam synchron unitarili one moment yet aggreg sum total finit sec univers univers integr meta physic physic phenomenon equat intellect june dictionari vol
TEXT: 118wealth.“[W]hat I mean by wealth seems to break down into two very important fundamentals. One is the energy which we employ for our metabolic regeneration; and I see then the energy as operative in two fundamental pat- terns, energies which are disassociative, radiant energies, and the energies which are sociative.” —“World Man,” 1966, pp. 48–49, LINE: 194, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: wealth hat mean wealth break two import fundament one energi employ metabol regener see energi oper two fundament pat tern energi radiant energi energi soci world man
TEXT: In Calvin Tompkins’s article “In the Outlaw Area,” published in The New Yorker on January 8, 1966, Fuller explains that “energy, not gold” constitutes “real wealth”—wealth that is “not only without practical limit but indestructible.” “Man’s intellect, his ability to tap the cosmic resources of energy and make them work for him,” he asserts, is what causes wealth “to be regenerative, or self-augmenting.”, LINE: 195, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: articl outlaw area new yorker fuller energi gold real wealth wealth without practic limit indestruct man intellect abil tap cosmic resourc energi make work caus wealth regen self
TEXT: “Wealth: Energy is the essence of wealth,wealth being the organized capability to support life.” —Human Unsettlement (2), 20 September 1976; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 4, p. 483“Wealth: Wealth is the measurable degree of established operative advantage locally orga- nized by intellect over the locally occurring differentiable behaviors of universal energy., LINE: 196, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: wealth energi essenc wealth wealth organ capabl support life human unsettl dictionari vol wealth wealth measur degre establish oper advantag local intellect local differenti behavior univers energi
TEXT: Wealth is an irreversible advantage: it can- not be expended in preferred reorganization of past events; it can only be expended on orga- nizing forward events in preferential patterns.” —Equation of Intellect (B), 17 June 1975; cited in Synergetics Dictionary, 1986, vol. 4, p. 483, LINE: 197, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: wealth irrevers advantag prefer reorgan past event forward event preferenti pattern equat intellect june dictionari vol
TEXT: 119 López-Pérez: glossaryThe following set of ten blueprints was assembled by Princeton professor J. Robert Hillier while he was a student in Fuller’s experimental studio in 1960. These drawings, along with other materials documenting the studio at Princeton in the spring of 1960, can be found in a publication entitled Geoscope—1960 in the rare books collection, Marquand Library, Princeton University., LINE: 198, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: follow set ten blueprint wa professor wa student fuller experiment studio draw along materi studio spring found public rare book collect librari univers
TEXT: Geoscope-1960r. buckminster fuller120121122123 fuller: geoscope-1960124125 fuller: geoscope-1960126127 fuller: geoscope-1960128129 fuller: geoscope-1960Postscript:R. Buckminster Fuller and Louis I. Kahn, LINE: 199, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller fuller fuller fuller fuller postscript fuller
TEXT: Stan Allen130Robert Geddes: Lou and Bucky had a very close relationship at Yale. In fact, Bucky spoke at Lou’s funeral.Stan Allen: Really?Geddes: We talked about Lou then. And I think that Bucky had an extraordinary influence on Lou philosophically. The other aspect about Lou I think was that he was trying to create architecture that was really comprehensive. I mean, just the way Bucky talks about comprehensive invention, or oneness, that really was the essence of Lou. I think they were very close — it was a kinship between those two., LINE: 200, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: bucki close relationship yale fact bucki spoke funer realli think bucki extraordinari influenc philosoph aspect think wa wa tri creat architectur wa realli comprehens mean way bucki talk comprehens invent one realli wa essenc think close wa kinship two
TEXT: —Robert Geddes and Stan Allen, in conversation, 2012The existence of a close friendship between R. Buckminster Fuller and Louis I. Kahn may come as a surprise to many people (as it did to me). The work of these two giant figures of twentieth- century architecture has little in common. Perhaps more than any other architect of the recent past, Kahn is identified with solidity, weight, and mass. His is an architecture wedded to the ground: “I draw a building from the ground up because that’s the way it is constructed. It depends on gravity. You begin with the way the weights can be distributed on the land, and then you build up.”1 Fuller was, by contrast, a maverick polymath who famously asked, “Madam, do you know what your house weighs?”2 He insisted that the urgent social and environmen- tal challenges facing mankind in the twentieth century required a break with the past; only by starting from scratch and ignoring conventional boundaries, LINE: 201, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: convers exist close friendship fuller may come surpris mani peopl work two giant figur twentieth centuri architectur ha littl common perhap architect recent past solid weight mass architectur wed ground draw build ground way graviti begin way weight distribut land build fuller wa contrast maverick polymath famous madam know hous urgent social tal challeng face mankind twentieth centuri break past start scratch convent boundari
TEXT: between disciplines would it be possible to produce new solutions. Kahn, who had a copy of Piranesi’s Campo Marzio pinned above his drawing table, saw his work as a continuing conversation with history. Deeply aware of the ways in which tra- ditional building techniques had shaped the architecture of the past, Kahn was searching for ways to use contemporary technology to realize an architecture that had the same authentic relationship to its means of construction. His origins were, LINE: 202, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: disciplin would possibl produc new solut copi campo pin draw tabl saw work convers histori deepli awar way tra build techniqu shape architectur past wa search way use contemporari technolog realiz architectur authent relationship mean construct origin
TEXT: Louis Kahn, arches under Presidential Square, Dacca, Bangladesh, 1962–83131in the fine arts, and he had a deep con- nection to architecture’s traditional tools, drawing in particular. For Fuller, the areas of expertise defined by conventional disciplines (archi- tecture, engineering, industrial design, ecology, cartography, etc., LINE: 203, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: arch presidenti squar fine art deep con architectur tradit tool draw particular fuller area defin convent disciplin engin industri design ecolog cartographi
TEXT: ) were simply an impediment to invention. His great- est achievements often happened in the space between disciplines. Kahn is, by contrast, shaped by the discipline— by his Beaux-Arts training with Paul Philippe Cret, by his stay at the American Academy in Rome, and by his devotion to history., LINE: 204, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: simpli impedi invent great achiev often space disciplin contrast shape disciplin beau art train stay academi devot histori
TEXT:  After Kahn, we think of tecton- ics, materiality, detail, space, and order differently; after Fuller, we think of the task of the architect differently. Yet Kahn and Fuller shared a friend- ship dating back to the 1930s., LINE: 205, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: think materi detail space order differ fuller think task architect differ yet fuller friend ship date back
TEXT:  Both were stubbornly individualistic and held an optimistic belief in the perfectibility of mankind. Robert Geddes points to a shared interest in geometry and Fuller’s influence on Kahn’s philosophy. This rings true; both had a deep intellectual curiosity, a speculative intelligence, and an aspiration to universality., LINE: 206, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: stubbornli individualist optimist belief perfect mankind point interest geometri fuller influenc philosophi ring true deep intellectu curios specul intellig aspir univers
TEXT:  Similar worldviews can take different forms, as they do in the case of Kahn and Fuller. But the Fuller connection also serves to open up our thinking about Kahn, moving us away from the reductive view of Kahn., LINE: 207, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: similar take differ form case fuller fuller connect also serf open think move away reduct view
TEXT: as the poetic avatar of “silence and light” to reveal a more complex idea of what constitutes architectural knowledge. To say that Kahn and Fuller share a preoccupation with geometry is, however, to say very little. All architects work with geometry. It is the medium through which abstract ideas become real; everything in architecture must pass through the filter of geometry. Some architects make geometry more thematic, though, and both Kahn and Fuller used geometry very explicitly. But the geometries they worked with and the ways in which they worked with them are very different. The differ- ences are telling. Their divergent ideas about geometry illuminate larger, more fundamental differences., LINE: 208, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: poetic silenc light reveal complex idea architectur knowledg say fuller share preoccup geometri howev say littl architect work geometri medium abstract idea becom real everyth architectur must filter geometri architect make geometri themat though fuller use geometri explicitli geometri work way work differ differ tell diverg idea geometri illumin fundament differ
TEXT: 01“Ferro-concrete architecture may be likened to the plastic cocoon of the archaic worm from which will emerge the 4-D butterfly.” —R. Buckminster Fuller, Your Private SkyFuller works with geometry in its purest state. Geometry for Fuller is lines of force and resistance: a diagram of performance. Geometry fosters abstract thought at the same time as it provides a powerful problem-solving tool. Calculable and verifiable, unburdened by history or symbolism, it delineates the shortest path from analysis to solution. In one sense, some of Fuller’s best-known inventions are pure geometry. The geodesic dome,, LINE: 209, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: concret architectur may plastic cocoon archaic worm emerg butterfli fuller privat work geometri state geometri fuller line forc resist diagram perform geometri foster abstract thought time power problem tool calcul verifi unburden histori symbol path analysi solut one sens fuller best known invent pure geometri geodes dome
TEXT: Fuller with polyhedral models, photographed by Nancy Newhall, 1948132Marine Corps lifting Fuller’s 30-foot wood and plastic dome at Orphan’s Hill, North Carolina, 1954133 Allen: Postscript: fuller and Kahn, LINE: 210, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller polyhedr model nanci marin corp lift fuller foot wood plastic dome orphan hill north postscript fuller
TEXT: for example, is a geometric principle indifferent to its material realization. Domes can and have been built out of steel, cardboard, plywood, fabric, plastics, and even venetian blinds. They have been realized as highly engineered space frames or constructed out of recycled sheet metal from junked cars. As an engineer, Fuller could hardly ignore gravity, but he liked things that could be turned upside down and still function. The tensegrity mast is a brilliant example of a structural principle that seems to defy gravity. By resisting gravity not with mass but with geometry traced in wires and struts, the effect of weightlessness is achieved. The principle works equally well in all directions: “It has no top, bottom or sides, and could be placed into orbit.”3 For Fuller, gravity is an, LINE: 211, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: exampl geometr principl indiffer materi realiz dome built steel cardboard plywood fabric plastic even blind highli space frame sheet metal car engin fuller could hardli ignor graviti thing could turn upsid still function mast brilliant exampl structur principl defi graviti resist graviti mass geometri wire strut effect weightless principl work equal well direct ha top bottom side could orbit fuller graviti
TEXT: active, vectorial force, and through geo- ­metric manipulation it can be shaped and redirected. Geometry is what allows him to do “more with less.” Kahn, by contrast, is an architect of compression, for whom material choices are laden with meaning and architectural consequence. Compression thema- tizes weight and mass. It is self-limiting, because mass adds weight, which in turn requires additional mass. The architec- tural repertoire of compression is fixed: walls, columns, arches, and vaults. All of these appear in Kahn’s work. His geom- etries are elemental: squares, circles, and triangles, built up according to the load- bearing logic of compression into cubes, cylinders, or pyramids. Kahn is an archi- tect of addition. He adds one element to another to create a larger whole in which the parts always retain their autonomy. Fuller, on the other hand, is a designer of abstract geometric frameworks, expansive, LINE: 212, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: activ vectori forc geo metric manipul shape geometri less contrast architect compress materi choic laden mean architectur consequ compress thema weight mass self limit mass add weight turn addit mass repertoir compress fix wall column arch vault appear work element squar circl triangl built accord load bear logic compress cube cylind pyramid addit add one element anoth creat whole part alway retain autonomi fuller hand design abstract geometr framework expans
TEXT: above: Fuller and Venetian Blind Dome, with Elaine de Kooning, Josef Albers, and others at Black Mountain College, 1948Kahn, Mosque at the National Assembly of Bangladesh, Dacca, plansand complete in themselves., LINE: 213, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller blind dome elain black mountain colleg mosqu nation assembl complet
TEXT:  For Kahn, the built work is definitive, and drawing is a means to conceive the building. For Fuller, each realization is just one among many possible exemplars of the geometric principles contained in the drawing., LINE: 214, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: built work definit draw mean conceiv build fuller realiz one among mani possibl exemplar geometr principl draw
TEXT:  There is no definitive “work of architecture” for Fuller, only full-scale prototypes and working models. Kahn’s metaphysics of “order” implies a deeper logic to geom- etry, beyond formal composition or symbolism., LINE: 215, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: definit work architectur fuller full scale prototyp work model metaphys order logic beyond formal composit symbol
TEXT:  The role of the architect for Kahn is not invention so much as discovery—to uncover and make visible the fundamental ordering principles of elemental geom- etry. His aspiration is beyond the momentary and the circumstantial toward timelessness; for Kahn, “archaic” is a positive value., LINE: 216, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: role architect invent much discoveri uncov make visibl fundament principl element aspir beyond momentari circumstanti toward timeless archaic posit valu
TEXT:  This is what gives some of his buildings (especially his late work) the quality of ruins. Note the way in which all the signs of contempo- rary technology or occupation, such as window frames and glazing, are pushed back from the surface so that only the hard materials that can persist over time remain visible., LINE: 217, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: give build especi late work qualiti ruin note way sign technolog occup window frame glaze back surfac hard materi persist time remain visibl
TEXT:  What Kahn and Fuller share is an aspiration to universality, to an architecture that has an impact beyond its immediate circumstance. But Kahn’s metaphysics of the eternal contrasts with Fuller’s mystical faith in the power of technology and invention to transform human habitation., LINE: 218, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller share aspir univers architectur ha impact beyond immedi circumst metaphys etern contrast fuller mystic faith power technolog invent transform human habit
TEXT: ., LINE: 219, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: 02“And specifically what Fuller had us working on, I remember, were really two things. One was geometry and the other was performance.” —Robert Geddes, on Fuller’s teaching methodsJust as Fuller and Kahn use geometry in different ways, they think about program and performance differently. A telling anecdote: A friend of mine grew up in a geodesic dome in Northern California. She liked to tell the story of the escalat- ing paranoia provoked by a teenage LSD experiment in a house with no corners. In a geometric space designed for maximum domestic efficiency, there is no place to hide. It’s an extreme example, but it underscores the limits of Fuller’s emphasis on geometry and performance. Performance implies optimization for one thing at a time and may not account for the full range of human experience. Contrast that to Kahn’s observation that, LINE: 220, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: specif fuller work rememb realli two thing one wa geometri wa perform fuller teach fuller use geometri differ way think program perform differ tell anecdot friend mine grew geodes dome northern tell stori ing paranoia teenag experi hous corner geometr space design maximum domest effici place hide extrem exampl underscor limit fuller emphasi geometri perform perform optim one thing time may account full rang human experi contrast observ
TEXT: Tensegrity mast, Museum of Modern Art, New York, 1959. Fuller’s North Carolina State University workshop constructed the mast in 1950.135 Allen: Postscript: fuller and Kahn“architecture must have bad spaces as well as good spaces., LINE: 221, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: mast museum modern art new york fuller north state univers workshop mast postscript fuller architectur must bad space well good space
TEXT: ”4 For Kahn, the building is conceived as a fixed stage for the messy drama of human activity. This is in part what made Kahn such an effec- tive architect of buildings for collective, institutional programs., LINE: 222, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: build fix stage messi drama human activ part made architect build collect institut program
TEXT:  He had a certain faith in the idea that people working together could solve problems, whether in a laboratory or a parliament, and that the right architectural framework could encourage that collaboration., LINE: 223, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: certain faith idea peopl work togeth could solv problem whether laboratori parliament right architectur framework could encourag collabor
TEXT:  This is the social principle expressed by his formal strategy of part-to-whole aggrega- tion: individuals coming together to form a larger whole, a focused collective, in which each voice can still be heard., LINE: 224, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: social principl express formal strategi part whole individu come togeth form whole collect voic still
TEXT:  He is an architect of “group form,” and it is not accidental that some of his most important buildings and projects are for churches and synagogues.5., LINE: 225, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: architect group form accident import build project church synagogu
TEXT: 03“Lou and Bucky did not really com- municate since they spoke such different creative languages. Bucky worked with pure geometric forms but not with geometry as an underly- ing principle for a variety of tangible architectural expressions.” —Anne Tyng, introduction to, LINE: 226, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: bucki realli sinc spoke differ creativ languag bucki work pure geometr form geometri underli ing principl varieti tangibl architectur express introduct
TEXT: Louis Kahn to Anne Tyng:The Rome Letters, 1953–54If there is a missing link in the story of Fuller and Kahn, it is Anne Griswold Tyng. Kahn’s employee, collaborator (and lover), Tyng made significant contribu- tions to the work of the office during the years that they worked together., LINE: 227, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: letter miss link stori fuller employe collabor lover made signific work offic year work togeth
TEXT:  Tyng met Fuller in 1949, and he often referred to her as “Kahn’s geometrical strategist.” In the projects Tyng was involved in—the Yale University Art Gallery (1951–53) and the City Tower project (1951–58)—Kahn comes closest to Fuller’s geometric sen- sibility., LINE: 228, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: met fuller often geometr strategist project wa involv yale univers art galleri citi tower project come fuller geometr sen
TEXT:  In the City Tower, for the first (and last) time in Kahn’s work, a lightweight, basketlike lattice of linear structural elements appears in place of the closed vocabulary of geometric solids. The tower weaves back and forth, as dictated by a triangulated structural logic, rather than extruding directly up from the plan geom- etries., LINE: 229, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: citi tower first last time work lightweight lattic linear structur element place close vocabulari geometr solid tower weav back forth structur logic rather extrud directli plan
TEXT:  In fact, there is no plan at all, at least not in the classical sense of the plan as the formal disposition of spaces: the tower’s plan is simply a horizontal sec- tion of a continuous spatial matrix within which no single orientation is primary., LINE: 230, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fact plan least classic sens plan formal disposit space tower plan simpli horizont sec continu spatial matrix within singl orient primari
TEXT:  In another departure from Kahn’s usual practice, the entire structure perches on thin legs, lifting off the ground to create an open public space below. The collaborations with Tyng are Kahn’s nearest approximation of Fuller’s lightweight, triangulated geometries., LINE: 231, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: anoth departur usual practic entir structur perch thin leg lift ground creat open public space collabor nearest approxim fuller lightweight geometri
TEXT: 6 But even in these, Kahn’s sense of placemaking tempers Fuller’s drive toward abstraction and uni- versality. In his treatment of the., LINE: 232, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: even sens placemak temper fuller drive toward abstract treatment
TEXT: Kahn, Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut, 1951– 53, section and plan detail of the tetrahedral concrete slab136base, Kahn designed an elevated public forum with a series of austere circular enclosures. In the final version of the project, the shear caps are multiplied and exaggerated to create “hollow capitals.” This is pure Kahn: a way to accommodate modern building services and incorporate structural shear caps within a hollowed- out fragment of classical architecture. It is his version of doing “more with less.” Visually, the caps create a rhythmic coun- terpoint to the continuous geometries of the triangulated frame. The project, which was never realized, exists in a number of versions, created as Kahn and Tyng tested site and program,, LINE: 233, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: yale univers art galleri new section plan detail tetrahedr concret slab base design elev public forum seri auster circular enclosur final version project shear cap exagger creat hollow capit pure way accommod modern build servic incorpor structur shear cap within fragment classic architectur version less visual cap creat rhythmic continu geometri frame project wa never number version test site program
TEXT: refining the design and lobbying for a commission. Clearly Tyng was the catalyst to moving Kahn out of his com- fort zone in this instance, but the ground had been prepared, perhaps precisely through his long friendship with Fuller and their shared interest in geometry. As in Fuller’s work, the way in which these geometries resonate with natural form provides a secure philosophical underpin- ning. Tyng, Kahn later wrote, “knows the aesthetic implications of the geometry inherent in biological structures bringing us in touch with the edge between the measurable and the unmeasurable.”7, LINE: 234, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: refin design commiss clearli wa catalyst move fort zone instanc ground prepar perhap precis long friendship fuller interest geometri fuller work way geometri reson natur form secur philosoph underpin later wrote know aesthet implic geometri inher biolog structur touch edg measur unmeasur
TEXT: 04“In fact Bucky saw himself first of all as in inventor; I don’t think he thought of himself as a designer at all in the way that architects did.” —Robert GeddesIn the end, Kahn and Fuller left distinct legacies. Fuller was a futurist, and technological change has cast him in a new light. Today he has become a point of departure for alternative practices that, often with the aid of advanced computer technology, look to solve a wide range of problems associated with the built environment. “Bucky Fuller was no architect,” said Philip Johnson, confirming Geddes’s assessment. “He was an inventor and a guru and a poet.”8 This multivalence has come to define his character. Fuller did not so much drill, LINE: 235, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fact bucki saw first inventor think thought design way architect end fuller left distinct legaci fuller wa futurist technolog chang ha cast new light today ha becom point departur altern practic often aid advanc comput technolog look solv wide rang problem associ built environ bucki fuller wa architect said confirm assess wa inventor guru poet multival ha come defin charact fuller much drill
TEXT: Kahn and Anne Tyng, City Tower, 1956–57, model137 Allen: Postscript: fuller and Kahndown into one specific area of expertise as link knowledge across fields. His idea of the task of the architect was an expansive one, encompassing any field that might touch on technology, building, or the environment., LINE: 236, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: citi tower model postscript fuller one specif area link knowledg across field idea task architect wa expans one field might touch technolog build environ
TEXT:  Conventional architectural programs played a relatively small role in his thinking; instead, architecture for Fuller implied a funda- mental, ground-up redesign of the structures of living, the organization of the building industry, and the allocation of resources., LINE: 237, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: convent architectur program rel small role think instead architectur fuller mental ground redesign structur live organ build industri alloc resourc
TEXT:  This is what made him so attractive to the counter-culture in the 1960s and what makes him a model for those who want to invest contemporary practice with a broader relevance in times of environmental, social, and urban crisis., LINE: 238, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: made attract counter cultur make model want invest contemporari practic relev time environment social urban crisi
TEXT:  Kahn’s legacy, by contrast, resides primarily within architecture as a disci- pline. His entire career was devoted to finding architecture’s core. Stripping away the inessential, he went in search of a kind of degree zero of architecture., LINE: 239, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: legaci contrast primarili within architectur discu entir career wa devot find architectur core strip away inessenti went search kind degre zero architectur
TEXT:  He., LINE: 240, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: left us with enduring ideas of material, tectonics, detail, and order, embodied in buildings, drawings, and projects. His written and spoken pronouncements, while often obscure, have a kind of stub- born poetry about them. His working concepts such as “served” and “servant” spaces have entered the everyday lexicon of practice. Thanks to his influence on Robert Venturi, he has been identified as a precursor of postmodernism.9 Equally, advocates of reductive geometries and sober tectonics, such as Tadao Ando, claim Kahn’s work as foundational. Whenever architects juxtapose simplified plan figures in tensely calibrated relation- ships, as does John Hejduk in his early work, Kahn’s metaphysics of order is inevitably evoked. Beyond these specific disciplinary references, Kahn needs to be recognized as an architect of evocative civic spaces. His greatest contribution is in reshaping the architecture of public institutions and their urban framework., LINE: 241, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: left endur idea materi tecton detail order build draw project written spoken pronounc often obscur kind stub born poetri work concept servant space everyday lexicon practic thank influenc ha precursor equal advoc reduct geometri sober tecton claim work foundat whenev architect juxtapos simplifi plan figur tens relat ship doe earli work metaphys order inevit beyond specif disciplinari refer need architect evoc civic space contribut architectur public institut urban framework
TEXT: Chuck Hoberman, expanding geodesic dome, 20-foot diameter, machined aluminum, 1991138His elemental geometries and part- to-whole compositions create spaces that resonate with the public and tangibly connect the present to the past., LINE: 242, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: chuck expand geodes dome foot diamet aluminum element geometri part whole composit creat space reson public tangibl connect present past
TEXT:  That his work can sponsor such distinc- tive legacies is the measure of its depth and complexity. Paradoxically, it is precisely Kahn and Fuller’s shared interest in geometry that reveals their starkest difference., LINE: 243, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: work sponsor legaci measur depth complex paradox precis fuller interest geometri differ
TEXT:  For Fuller, the abstract, mathematical character of geometry allows him to range across a wide variety of disciplines. Everything that geometry touches— cartography, engineering, demograph- ics, urbanism, architecture, industrial design—is made available through calcu- lation and geometric drawing., LINE: 244, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller abstract mathemat charact geometri rang across wide varieti disciplin everyth geometri touch cartographi engin urban architectur industri design made avail lation geometr draw
TEXT:  Kahn, by contrast, sees geometry as a fundamen- tal architectural property. Geometry is what endows architecture with universal intelligibility; it is accessible to everyone. The timeless character of Kahn’s public buildings is achieved through geometries that are shared by architectures ancient and modern., LINE: 245, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: contrast see geometri tal architectur properti geometri architectur univers intellig access everyon timeless charact public build geometri architectur ancient modern
TEXT:  Both Fuller and Kahn took the long view. An overarching aspiration to test each specific case against a general., LINE: 246, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller took long view aspir test specif case gener
TEXT: principle guided their parallel endeavors. Each sought to elevate his life’s work above the circumstantial. For Fuller, this was achieved through science and mathematics and an expansive, intercon- nected worldview., LINE: 247, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: principl parallel endeavor sought elev life work circumstanti fuller wa scienc mathemat expans
TEXT:  He saw everything from the Dymaxion House (1920s– 1945) to Spaceship Earth (1968) as a manifestation of basic principles of synergy, nested structure, and geomet- ric order. Kahn, too, saw architecture as a manifestation of a deeper order, in his case of the elemental geometries that link past and present., LINE: 248, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: saw everyth hous spaceship earth manifest basic principl synergi structur order saw architectur manifest order case element geometri link past present
TEXT:  Like Fuller’s friendship with John Cage (another case of close, personal affiliation and divergent artistic sensibilities), the mutual attraction between Kahn and Fuller is not necessarily reflected in the specifics of the work., LINE: 249, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: like fuller friendship cage anoth case close person affili diverg artist sensibl mutual attract fuller necessarili reflect specif work
TEXT:  At a decisive moment, Fuller exercised an important influence on Kahn, but it is also true that Kahn translated those ideas into his own idiom. Kahn’s example, on the other hand, illuminates Fuller’s work primarily by contrast., LINE: 250, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: decis moment fuller import influenc also true idea idiom exampl hand fuller work primarili contrast
TEXT:  It is perhaps a necessary counterpoint, marking out the limits of Fuller’s engagements with geometry and architecture’s disciplinary structure.., LINE: 251, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: perhap necessari counterpoint mark limit fuller engag geometri architectur disciplinari structur
TEXT: John Hejduk, One-Half House, 1965, second floor plan139 Allen: Postscript: fuller and KahnNotesAll statements by Robert Geddes are taken from an interview conducted in Princeton, New Jersey, on November 9, 2012. During my final year as dean of the School of Architecture at Princeton, I sat down with Geddes, professor emeritus and dean of the school from 1965 to 1982, to discuss his memories of Fuller’s 1966 Kassler lecture. Geddes had participated in Fuller’s studios at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology while a student at the Harvard Graduate School of Design in the late 1940s. During the late 1950s and early 1960s, Geddes taught architecture and urban design alongside Louis Kahn at the University of Pennsylvania. At the time of our interview, I was struck by his description of a close sympathy between Kahn and Fuller. This essay is the result., LINE: 252, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: one half hous second floor plan postscript fuller statement taken interview new jersey final year dean school architectur sat professor emeritu dean school discu memori fuller lectur fuller studio institut technolog student graduat school design late late earli taught architectur urban design alongsid univers time interview wa struck descript close sympathi fuller essay result
TEXT: 1. Louis I. Kahn, quoted in Michael Merrill, Louis Kahn: Drawing to Find Out. The Dominican Motherhouse and the Patient Search for Architecture (Baden, Germany: Lars Müller, 2010), 78.2. R. Buckminster Fuller, paraphrased in Reyner Banham, “A Home Is Not a House,” Art in America 2 (April 1965): 111., LINE: 253, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: draw find patient search architectur muller fuller home hous art
TEXT: 3. Kenneth Snelson, quoted online at tensegrity.wikispaces.com/Fuller,+Richard +Buckminster. Accessed May 20, 2013.4. Louis I. Kahn, quoted in Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1966), 25., LINE: 254, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller may complex contradict architectur new york museum modern art
TEXT: 5. Geddes refers to the concept of “group form” to emphasize Kahn’s close atten- tion to community in contrast to Fuller’s celebration of individual self-reliance: “Nowthere my recollection of [Fuller] was that he really wanted to create autonomous man.... There was a great interest in the Dymaxion House, which was related to the idea of an autonomous, self-supporting, self-sufficient individual. Now for me that was always a problem, because if one comes to think of group form, of community form—a community either of objects or buildings or activities— the notion of autonomy is antithetical to that. I think that his real dream would have been to figure out some way to build a structure that you could bring in by helicopter and that would then support itself forever from that point on.” On group form, see also Fumihiko Maki, “Investigations in Collective Form,” Publication of the School of Architecture, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, June 1964., LINE: 255, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: concept group form emphas close commun contrast fuller celebr individu self relianc recollect fuller wa realli creat autonom man wa great interest hous wa relat idea autonom self support self suffici individu wa alway problem one come think group form commun form commun either object build activ notion autonomi antithet think real dream would figur way build structur could bring helicopt would support forev point group form see also maki investig collect form public school architectur univers june
TEXT: 6. Another significant convergence around Kahn and Tyng is the work of the engineer Robert Le Ricolais, their colleague at the University of Pennsylvania, who is sometimes referred to as the “father of spatial struc- tures.” See Sarah Williams Goldhagen, Louis Kahn’s Situated Modernism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001). In chapter 3, “Techno-Organic Symbols of Community,” she details the interplay between Kahn, Tyng, Fuller, and Le Ricolais and their shared interests in complex geom- etries and latticelike structures in nature., LINE: 256, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: anoth signific converg around work engin colleagu univers sometim father spatial see situat modern new yale univers press chapter organ symbol commun detail interplay fuller interest complex structur natur
TEXT: 7. The question of credit needs to be addressed, especially given the gender politics of the time. With regard to the City Tower, Tyng’s recollection is definitive: “The tower is really just something I did. Bob Venturi had recently joined the office and he did a lot of work on the base of the tower. Lou also worked on the base, so he didn’t have much to do with the tower either., LINE: 257, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: question credit need especi given gender polit time regard citi tower recollect definit tower realli someth bob recent offic lot work base tower also work base much tower either
TEXT: 140He didn’t really grasp the geometry that well.” Anne Tyng, quoted in Srdjan Jovanovic Weiss, “The Life Geometric,” Domus 947 (May 2011), at http://www.domusweb.it/en/ interview/the-life-geometric/. Accessed May 20, 2013., LINE: 258, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: realli grasp geometri well life geometr may interview life geometr may
TEXT: Personally, I am ambivalent on the issue of credit. The visual evidence is on the side of a decisive contribution by Tyng. Never before or after did Kahn make a building remotely like the City Tower. It is also true, however, that none of Tyng’s independent work approaches the sophistication of the City Tower. Perhaps a compelling argument can be made for this as an ideal collabora- tion: two architects, coming from different places but with a strong personal chemistry, making something that neither would have been capable of on their own., LINE: 259, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: person ambival issu credit visual evid side decis contribut never make build remot like citi tower also true howev none independ work approach sophist citi tower perhap compel argument made ideal two architect come differ place strong person chemistri make someth neither would capabl
TEXT: Fuller himself claims credit for the geometry of the ceiling of the Yale Art Gallery, suggest­ing that he “converted” Kahn to geodesic thinking on their train rides to New Haven. See K. Michael Hays, “Fuller’s Geological Engagements with Architecture,” in Buckminster Fuller: Starting with the Universe, ed. K. Michael Hays and Dana Miller (New Haven: Yale University Press and the Whitney Museum of American Art, 2008), 19; and Irene E. Ayad, “Louis Kahn and Space Frames,” Beyond the Cube, The Architecture of Space Frames and Polyhedra (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1997), 229. Those who have looked carefully at the chronology suggest that this would have been impossible, as the geometry was in place before Kahn started commuting to Yale. See Goldhagen, Louis Kahn’s Situated Modernism, 65. Tyng recalls Kahn pushing pencils through the voids of her Bucks County Schoolhouse project to test how the, LINE: 260, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller claim credit geometri ceil yale art galleri suggest ing convert geodes think train ride new see hay fuller geolog engag architectur fuller start univers hay miller new yale univers press museum art iren space frame beyond cube architectur space frame polyhedron new york son care chronolog suggest would imposs geometri wa place commut yale see situat modern recal push pencil void buck counti schoolhous project test
TEXT: mechanical ducts might be threaded through the depth of the tetrahedral geometry. Here, too, the evidence points to Tyng’s contribu- tion, but the realization in concrete renders it closer to Kahn’s sensibility., LINE: 261, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: mechan duct might thread depth tetrahedr geometri evid point realiz concret render closer sensibl
TEXT: In any event, it is clear that Fuller tended to be proprietary about his discoveries. The sculptor Kenneth Snelson, who studied with Fuller at Black Mountain College, wrote, “I believed, literally, because he claimed so, that before Buckminster Fuller came along, no human had ever noticed, for example, that to inscribe the diagonals of the square faces of a cube was to define two interlock- ing tetrahedra within. Students joked that, after all, hadn’t Bucky invented the triangle? None of us knew, for example, of Alexander Graham Bell’s early space frames, nor any- thing at all about crystallography.” Tensegrity wiki, at http://tensegrity.wikispaces.com/ Snelson%2C+Kenneth. Accessed May 20, 2013., LINE: 262, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: event clear fuller proprietari discoveri sculptor studi fuller black mountain colleg wrote liter fuller came along human ever exampl inscrib diagon squar face cube wa defin two interlock ing tetrahedron within student bucki triangl none knew exampl graham bell earli space frame thing crystallographi may
TEXT: 8. Philip Johnson, quoted in Hays, “Fuller’s Geological Engagements with Architecture,” 2 .9. This is a complicated issue and beyond the scope of this essay. Briefly, I would say that although it is hard to reconcile Kahn’s tectonics of mass with Venturi’s paper-thin facades—and Kahn resisted the idea that architecture could ever be reduced to a sign system—Kahn’s elementalism is a neces- sary precondition of Venturi’s architecture of signs and symbols. Before you can think of architecture as available linguistic material (words and phrases that can be combined and recombined), you have to break it down into its constituent parts. That is exactly what Kahn did, which in turn gave Venturi a series of ready-made elements to freely manipulate, divorced from their original tectonic character., LINE: 263, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: hay fuller geolog engag architectur complic issu beyond scope essay briefli would say although hard reconcil tecton mass paper thin facad idea architectur could ever reduc sign system element precondit architectur sign symbol think architectur avail linguist materi word phrase combin break constitu part exactli turn gave seri readi made element freeli manipul origin tecton charact
TEXT: 141 Allen: Postscript: fuller and KahnContributorsStan Allen Stan Allen is an architect and George Dutton ’27 Professor of Architectural Design at the Princeton University School of Architecture, where he served as dean from 2002 to 2012. His practice, SAA/Stan Allen Architect, has realized buildings and projects from single-family houses to urban master plans, in the United States and abroad. The extensive catalog of architectural and urban strategies he developed to respond to the complexity of the modern city is presented in Points and Lines: Diagrams and Projects for the City (1999), and his essays are collected in Practice: Architecture, Technique and Representation (2009). His most recent book is Landform Building: Architecture’s New Terrain (2011)., LINE: 264, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: postscript fuller architect professor architectur design univers school architectur dean practic saa architect ha build project singl famili hous urban master plan unit state abroad extens architectur urban strategi respond complex modern citi point line diagram project citi essay collect practic architectur techniqu represent recent book build architectur new terrain
TEXT: Daniel López-Pérez Daniel López-Pérez, a Ph.D. candidate at the Princeton University School of Architecture, is an assistant professor of architectural design and founding faculty member of the architecture program at the University of San Diego. In 2009 he coedited The Function of Form, a comparative taxonomy of structural and formal systems. A Fuller scholar, López-Pérez is currently completing the manuscript of a book entitled R. Buckminster Fuller’s Spherical Atlas, 1944–1980., LINE: 265, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: candid univers school architectur assist professor architectur design found faculti member architectur program univers san function form compar taxonomi structur formal system fuller scholar current manuscript book fuller spheric atla
TEXT: Alejandro Zaera-Polo Alejandro Zaera-Polo is dean of the Princeton University School of Architecture. The internationally renowned architect and scholar previously served as dean of the Berlage Institute in Rotterdam, occupied the Berlage Chair at the Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands, and held the Norman R. Foster Visiting Professorship of Architectural Design at Yale University. Widely published in leading journals, such as El Croquis, Quaderns, and A+U, his essays are collected in The Sniper’s Log: An Architectural Perspective of Generation-X (2012). The award-winning work of Zaera-Polo’s firm, AZPA, includes the Yokohama International Cruise Terminal in Japan, distinguished by its dramatic form and innovative use of materials., LINE: 266, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: polo polo dean univers school architectur intern renown architect scholar previous dean institut chair delft univers technolog foster visit professorship architectur design yale univers wide lead journal essay collect sniper log architectur perspect gener award win work polo firm intern cruis termin japan distinguish dramat form innov use materi
TEXT: 142Illustrations10–11, 21, 22, 25, 47, 58, 73, 84, 93 Robert Geddes Papers, School of Architecture Archive, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey. Reproduced with permission of Princeton University and the Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller, LINE: 267, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: illustr paper school architectur archiv univers new jersey permiss univers estat fuller
TEXT: 14 Princeton Alumni Weekly, 27 November 1953, photograph by H. Schrader. Reproduced with per- mission of Princeton University17 R. Buckminster Fuller, World Design Science Decade, 1965–1975, Phase I, Document 2, The Design Initiative (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University, 1964), 89. Reproduced with permission of the Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller, LINE: 268, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: alumnu weekli photograph per mission univers fuller world design scienc decad phase document design initi ill southern univers permiss estat fuller
TEXT: 18 New York Times, 6 April 1960, photograph by Alan W. Richards26 Princeton Alumni Weekly, 22 April 1960, photograph by Elisabeth Menzies. Reproduced with permis- sion of Princeton University106–7 Diagram by Daniel López-Pérez with Ryan Barney, Advanced Geodesic Geometry Research Unit, Department of Art, Architecture and Art History, University of San Diego, www.sphericalatlas.com, LINE: 269, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: new york time photograph alan alumnu weekli photograph sion univers diagram barney advanc geodes geometri research unit depart art architectur art histori univers san
TEXT: 108–19 R. Buckminster Fuller’s Patent Drawings. Reproduced with permission of the Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller120–29 Geoscope—1960, School of Architecture Archive, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, March 1960, 58–76. Reproduced with permission of Princeton University and the Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller, LINE: 270, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller patent draw permiss estat fuller school architectur archiv univers new jersey march permiss univers estat fuller
TEXT: 131, 134 (bottom), 136, 137 Louis I. Kahn Collection, University of Pennsylvania and the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, Philadelphia132 San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, Accessions Committee Fund purchase. Photograph © Estate of Nancy Newhall, LINE: 271, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: bottom collect univers histor museum commiss san museum modern art access committe fund purchas photograph estat nanci
TEXT: 133 Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller134 (top) Courtesy of the Western Regional Archives, State Archives of North Carolina135 Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller138 Courtesy of Chuck Hoberman139 John Hejduk, Mask of Medusa: Works, 1947–1983 (New York: Rizzoli, 1985), LINE: 272, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: estat fuller top courtesi western region archiv state archiv north estat fuller courtesi chuck mask work new york
TEXT: 143Published by Princeton Architectural Press 37 East Seventh Street New York, New York 10003Visit our website at www.papress.com.© 2014 Princeton University School of Architecture All rights reserved Printed and bound in China 17 16 15 14 4 3 2 1 First edition, LINE: 273, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: architectur press east seventh street new york new york visit univers school architectur right reserv print bound china first edit
TEXT: No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner without written permission from the publisher, except in the context of reviews.The editors would like to acknowledge the Barr Ferree Foundation Fund, Department of Art and Archaeology, Princeton University, and the Faculty Research Fund, University of San Diego, for their generous support of this publication., LINE: 274, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: part book may use manner without written permiss publish except context review editor would like acknowledg foundat fund depart art archaeolog univers faculti research fund univers san gener support public
TEXT: R. Buckminster Fuller’s images courtesy the Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller. Fuller’s words from his previously unpublished 1966 Kassler lecture and from the Synergetics Dictionary: The Mind of Buckminster Fuller, compiled and edited by E. J. Applewhite © The Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller. All rights reserved., LINE: 275, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: fuller imag courtesi estat fuller fuller word previous unpublish lectur dictionari mind fuller estat fuller right reserv
TEXT: Every reasonable attempt has been made to identify owners of copyright. Errors or omissions will be corrected in subsequent editions.The Kassler Lectures Series Editor: Stan Allen Managing Editor, SoA Books: Nancy Eklund Later Project Editor, Princeton Architectural Press: Megan Carey Design: Omnivore, LINE: 276, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: everi reason attempt ha made identifi owner copyright error omiss correct subsequ edit lectur seri editor editor book nanci later project editor architectur press design omnivor
TEXT: Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data R. Buckminster Fuller : world man / Daniel López-Pérez, editor, with contributions by Alejandro Zaera-Polo and Stan Allen. — First [edition]. pages cm. — (The Kassler Lectures) Includes bibliographical references. ISBN 978-1-61689-094-0 (pbk.) 1. Architecture and globalization. 2. Architecture—Environmental aspects. 3. Architecture—Economic aspects. 4. Fuller, R. Buckminster (Richard Buckminster), 1895–1983—Criticism and interpretation. I. López, Daniel (López-Pérez), editor of compilation. II. Fuller, R. Buckminster (Richard Buckminster), 1895–1983. World man. III. Title. IV. Title: World man. NA2543.G46R2 2013 720.1’03—dc23 2013024619, LINE: 277, BOOK: R. Buckminster Fuller World Map, KEYWORD: librari congress public data fuller world man editor contribut polo first edit page lectur bibliograph refer architectur architectur environment aspect architectur econom aspect fuller critic interpret editor compil fuller world man titl titl world man
