TEXT: llruilm * d rllel:*llFi ir.r+nEPeter ZumthorThinking ArchitectureSecond, expanded editionBlrl<hdu s er-Pu bllsh ers fo r Arch iteccu reBasel . Boston. BerllnAWay of Looking atThingsThe Hard Core of Beauty, LINE: 0, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: expand er arch boston look hard core beauti
TEXT: From a Passion forThings to theThingsThemselvesThe Body of ArchitectureTeaching Architecture, Learning ArchiteciureDoes Beauty Have a Form?The 14agic of the RealThe Light in the Landscape537l658389A Way of Looking atThings, LINE: 1, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: passion bodi architectur learn beauti form light landscap way look
TEXT: ln search ofthe lost architecturewhen I thin< about architecture, images come nto my mind. l"1any ofthese images are connected wlth my training and work as trn architect.They contain the professlona l<nowledge about architecture that I have, LINE: 2, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: search lost thin architectur imag come mind imag connect train work architect contain architectur
TEXT: gathered over the years. Some ofthe other images haye to do with mychlldhood-There was a t me when I experienced architecture withour.hinl(ing about it. Sometimes I can almost feel a particuLar door hand e, LINE: 3, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: year imag wa experienc architectur ing sometim almost feel particular door hand
TEXT: in my hand, a piece of metal shaped like rhe bacl< of a spoon.I used to tal(e hold of r when I went into my aunt's garden.That doorhand e sti seems to me lil(e a special sign of entry into a world of dif-, LINE: 4, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: hand piec metal shape like rhe spoon use tal hold went aunt garden special sign entri world
TEXT: fcrent moods and snrells. I remember the sound of the grave underrny feet, lhe soft sleam o{ the waxed on< staircase,I can hear the heavyn ont door closing beh nd me as I wa l< along the dark corridor and en-, LINE: 5, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: mood rememb sound grave foot soft staircas hear door along dark corridor
TEXT: tcr the (itchen. che only really brightly lit room n the house.Look ng back, it seems as ifthis was the only room in the house in whichthc cciling d d noc d sappear inro twilighqthe small hexagonal tiles of, LINE: 6, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: che realli brightli lit room hous look back wa room hous inro small hexagon tile
TEXT: rl,c {loorrdark red afd firted so tighdy togetherthat the cmcks betweenrhcm wcre almost mperceptiblc, were hard and uny elding under myl, ct. irnd ir smell ofoi piint issucd from dre kitchen cupboard.Ivcrytlring iborL th s kitchon wrs typicr of r L,;rditionil <irchen.There, LINE: 7, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: red almost hard eld smell kitchen cupboard
TEXT: w rr no(liin! spc. il rboul r lir( tn,rli.rt^ I wrs ir st the fact that ll wnsr() v(,ry fnrc[,50 vcr y mrrr,rlly ,r krll lr,1r .rr h,rs r]rpr intcd i$ memo yrrlr blyori riy nrri,l llr, .'llf,,\,1!,t,'l rli, (r,,,,i\irrsoLrrby lfkcd, LINE: 8, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: liin fact memo
TEXT: with my idea ol a <itchen. Now I feel lke golng on and cal<ing aboutthe door handLes that came after the hard e on my aunCs garden gate,about the ground and the tloors,about the soft asphalt warmed by the, LINE: 9, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: idea feel cal ing door handl came hard garden gate ground soft asphalt warm
TEXT: sun, about the flagsrones covered with chestnut eaves in the autumn,and about all the doors that c osed in such different ways, one rep eteand dignlfied, anolher wi!h a thin, cheap c atcer, others hard, imp acn-, LINE: 10, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sun cover chestnut eav autumn door differ way one rep thin cheap hard imp
TEXT: b e, and intimidating ...lYemor es like !hese contaln the deepest architectuml experience thatI krrowThey are the reservoirs of the architecrura almospheres andimages tha! I explore in my work as an architect., LINE: 11, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: like experi reservoir tha explor work architect
TEXT: When I design a building,l frequenrLy find myself sinl<ing into old, half-forgotten memories, and then I try to recollect what the rememberedarchitectural situation was really like, what it had meant to me at the, LINE: 12, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: design build find ing old half forgotten memori tri situat wa realli like meant
TEXT: time,and I try to think how it cou d help me now ro revive that vibrantarmosphere perv:ded bythe simpLe presence ofthlngs,in which every-thing had lts own specific place and form.And a rhough I cannot trace, LINE: 13, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: time tri think help reviv simpl presenc everi thing specif place form cannot trace
TEXT: any special forms,there is a h nt of fullness and of richness that makesme think:this have seen before.Ye!,at the same rime,I know that i! isa I new and dlfferent. and that there is no direct reference to a former, LINE: 14, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: special form full rich think seen rime know new direct refer former
TEXT: work of architectlre which migh! divulge the secret of the memory-Made of materialsTo me, there is someching reveal ng abouc che work of joseph Beuys:rnd sorne ot drc i 16Ls of the Artc Povcra group.Whrt lnpresscs me, LINE: 15, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: work divulg secret memori made reveal che work group
TEXT: is rhc prc.isc irid scfsuous wiy d)cy rsc )ritcrii s.lL sccf)s rnclrorcdir irr rx , nr., oruriLl()owlc.lgc iboLr rnns Lrso offDr.rlr s,irrlir 'Flt .i "* r-.fr-q+Ftr.,, ,-d,{S {: ,-the same time to expose the very essence of these materials, which is, LINE: 16, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: irid time expos essenc materi
TEXT: beyond all cu turally conveyed meaning.I try to use materials like this ln rny worl(.I believe thatthey can assumea poetic q!allty in the context of an architectur: objecr, a rhough onlyifthe archltect is able to generate a meaning{ul situatlon for them,since, LINE: 17, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: beyond mean tri use materi like believ poetic context abl gener mean sinc
TEXT: rnaterials in themselves are not poetic.The sense that I try ro instlll into mater als is beyond alL rlles of com-position, and their mngbility, smell, and acoustic qualities are merelyelemen.s of the language rhat we are obliged to use. Sense emerges, LINE: 18, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: poetic sens tri mater al beyond posit smell acoust qualiti languag oblig use sens
TEXT: when succeed in bringinS out the speci{ic meanings of certain materials in my buildlngs, meanings that can only be perceived in iust this wayin thls one bu lding.lf we worl< rowards thls goal, we must constandy asl( olrselves what, LINE: 19, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: succeed mean certain materi mean one goal must
TEXT: the use of a particu ar material could mean ln a specific architecturalcontext.Good answers to these questlons can throw new light on boththe way in which the material ls generally used and its own inherent, LINE: 20, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: use materi could mean specif good answer throw new light way materi gener use inher
TEXT: sensuous qualities.lf lve succeed in this, materlak in architecture can be made to shineWorl( within thingsIt is said that one of the mos! imprcssive th n8s abolr che music oflohann Sebastian Bach is its"architeclLrrel hs consrru.tion seems clear, LINE: 21, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sensuou qualiti succeed architectur made within said one mo che music bach clear
TEXT: and transparent. lt is possible ro pursue the decails of $e m€odic,h.rmonic, .nd rhyrhmicil e cmcfts withoLrt los fg tlrc fccling for theconrposir or rs r who c thc wlt c rt nrikcs sc|sc of drc dclriLs, LINE: 22, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: transpar possibl pursu odic
TEXT: Thc rnrstr s(Dr\ r() lr l).rso.l Lrporrr.lcr, ! (r{r(rr',irr(l f wcrrrccthe individua threads of the musical fabfic, t is possible to apprehendrhe rules rhrt Bo!ern the s|u.trre o[ the nL5r(Construccion is the art of ma<ing a meaningfu wholeoutofmanyparts., LINE: 23, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: individua thread music possibl rule art ing
TEXT: Buidings are witnesses to th e human abilityto consrruct con c rete th ings.I believe tha! lhe real core of all architectural work lies in the act ofconstruction.At the point in tlrne when concrete materla s are assem-, LINE: 24, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wit human con believ tha real core architectur work lie act point concret
TEXT: bled and erected, the architecru.e we have been looking for be.omespart of the real world.lfeel respecrfor the art ofjo ning,the abilty ofc€ftsmen and engineers.I am impressed by the knowledge of how to ma<e thlnSs, which ies at, LINE: 25, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: look real world art engin knowledg
TEXT: the bottom of human sl(ill.I try to design buiLdings that are worthy of$ls knowledge and merlt the challenge to this skil.Pcople often say a lot of wor< went into this ' when they sense thecare and skil that its maker has aylshed on a carefu ly constructed ob-, LINE: 26, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: bottom human ill tri design build worthi knowledg challeng skil often say lot went sens skil maker ha
TEXT: iecr.The notlon that our work is an integml part ofwhat we accomplishLr(es us to the very limits of our muslngs abolt the value of a work ofirr, n work of architecture. Are the eftort and sl(il we put into them, LINE: 27, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: work part limit valu work work architectur put
TEXT: rcilly inherent parts of the things we make? Somellmes, v/hen I amnroved by a work of architecturc in the same way as I am moved by,,rusic, terature, or a painting, i am cempted co think so.For the silence of sleep, LINE: 28, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: inher part thing make hen work way paint think silenc sleep
TEXT: {rvc uLrsic.The s ow nrovemcnts of l"lozi ts piifo conccrros,lohn'l',,,' . b..r..d\ o,,lc u',,'r Jtl' 1" ,\r' ,"ii,n orglli(, lirfrinrbliryro rivLrir rii(,rl(.,, ir J | , r r , , .. , , r , i ' I r ry |s inrirzcs, LINE: 29, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: But the wor d of sound also embmces the opposite of me ody, harmo-ny, and rhythm.There is disharmony and broken rhyth m, fragments andclusters of soLrnd,and there ls also the purely functionn sound thar we, LINE: 30, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sound also opposit rhythm disharmoni broken fragment also pure sound thar
TEXT: cal noise. Contemporary music works with these elements.Cont€mporary archkecrure should be just as radical as contempo-mry music. But there are limits.Although awork ofarchilecture basedon disharmony and fragmentation, on bro<en rhythms, clusterlng and, LINE: 31, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: cal nois contemporari music work element radic music limit although awork disharmoni fragment rhythm
TEXT: so!ct!rn disruptions may be able to convey a message, as soon as weunderscand its statement our curiosity dies, and a that k le{t ls thequestion of the building's practical use{ulness.Architeclure has its own realm.lt has a special physical relarionship with, LINE: 32, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: disrupt may abl convey messag soon statement curios build practic use ha realm ha special physic
TEXT: ife. I do not think of it primarily as either a message or a symbol, butas an envelope and backSround for life which goes on in and arolnd t,'o| the .l /!hn o'foorsleps o'r rhe floor. ror lec/rcentratlon or woa<.ror the silence of s eep., LINE: 33, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ife think primarili either messag symbol envelop life go rhe floor silenc
TEXT: ,/'Preliminary promisesln its fnal, constructed form, architectlre has its pace in the con-crete wor d.This is where it exists.This is where ir makes its statement.Portrayals ofas yet unrealized architecturalwor<s represent an atrempt, LINE: 34, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: preliminari form ha pace con make statement portray yet unreal repres
TEXT: to give a voice ro something, which has not yet found its place in rheconcrete world for which lt is meant.Architectlra drawings rry !o express as accuratey as possibl€ theaura of the btrilding in its lftendcd p ace. gut precisely the effort of, LINE: 35, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: give voic someth ha yet found place world meant draw express ace gut precis effort
TEXT: rhe portrayal oftef serves ro undedine the ibserrce of rhc rctur obiecr,:r'id whi. rhcf cfrcrges s .f rwircncss of ihc ini.lcqrlircy of iny<incl ot portr,ry,rl. r Lr|os ty .rlnn,r I r rc,r ry I t, r, i !r!. I !l t{.r hipr, LINE: 36, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe portray serf
TEXT: if the promise has the p a longing for its Presence.lf .he naturalism and graph c virtuosity of architectura Porcraya s aretoo great, if they acl( "oPen Patches" where our imaginarion and curl-osity aboutthe reality ofthe draw ng can penetrate the image, rhe Por, LINE: 37, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: promis ha long presenc natur graph virtuos great open patch curl realiti draw penetr imag rhe
TEXT: trayal itselfbecomes the object ofour desire,and our longingfor lts re-a iry vvanes because there ls litt e or nothing in the representat on thatI -polnts to the intended reality beyond ir.The portraya no longer holds, LINE: 38, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: object desir noth intend realiti beyond longer hold
TEXT: I a promise. t refers only to itsellDesign drawings thar refer to a reality which stil les in the future areimporrant in nry worl( I continue worklng on my drawinSs untll theyr.rch the delicace point of reprcsentatlon when the Prevailing mood, LINE: 39, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: promis draw thar refer realiti futur continu point mood
TEXT: see( emerges, and I stoP before inessentials start detracting from jtsmpact.The drawing icself must take on the quality ofthe sought-for ob-lcct.lt s like a s<etch by a scu ptor for his sculPture, no. merely an i-, LINE: 40, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: see stop inessenti start draw must take qualiti sought like etch sculptur mere
TEXT: luscmrion of an idea but an lnnate part ofthe work of creation.whichcnds w th the constructed obiect.These sort of drawings enab e us to step back,to ook, and to learn tounderstand that wh ch has not yet come ln!o belrg and which has jusr, LINE: 41, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: idea part work creation sort draw step back learn ha yet come ha
TEXT: smrced ro emer8e.Chinks in sealed objectsBui d rgs :rre arlific a constr ucrions.They consist of single Pafts whichnNst be ioined togcdrciTo a lirge dcgrcc, the qu:r icy of the fnished.Lt ,, \ anr- , ,,' ,l ry . I,r.,rr,/ J . o,.\, LINE: 42, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: chink seal consist singl ici
TEXT: ln sc!lptLrrc, drcrc s r trrrlir rrr r[irrrrrrrii/c!rlrc!]tPrcssionofrhcl(,1irs ifd ioins bcrw.r,, rlx \|r)t( trirr! Ur lrv(n (,f rhc ovor fornrlr (lrir.l Sc,i.,\ !ro(, ol1r', r'.1,,r, r r,,,, l,' il. l, I r" lr),,,,)lt(,,(rr\ irr(l, LINE: 43, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: .*,$'t' " ..''lintegralas the stone and wood sculptures ofolder sculpturaltraditions.l'lany ofthe installations and objects by artisrs of the 1960s and 70s rely on the simplestand mostobvious methods ofjoiningand connectinS, LINE: 44, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: stone wood sculptur instal object reli method
TEXT: .hatwe l(now geuys, 14 erz, and others often used loose settings in spac-cs. coils,folds, and layers when deve op ng a whole from rhe individualp.r$.The direct,seemingy self-evident way in which these objects are, LINE: 45, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: often use loos set coil fold layer whole rhe direct self evid way object
TEXT: fur logether is !nteresting.There is no interruption of the overall im-prcssion by small parts th:t have nothing to do wlth the object! state-,iient. Our perception of the whole is not distracted by inessential de-, LINE: 46, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: fur interrupt overal small part noth object state percept whole distract inessenti
TEXT: riils. Evcry touch, every join, every joint is there in order to reinforcel lic idea of the quiet presence of the worl(.Whcn I design buildinSs,I try to give them this kind of presence. How-|vqt un lke rhe sculptor, I have to start with functional and technical re-, LINE: 47, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: touch everi join everi joint order idea quiet presenc design tri give kind presenc rhe sculptor start function technic
TEXT: ,tL, rcmenrs rhat represent the fundamentn tasl( I have to fulfill.Archi'r, rrurc is always faced with the challenge of developing n whole out of,i,i,,nrerib e details,out ofvarious functions nnd forms, materials and di-, LINE: 48, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: repres fulfil alway face challeng whole detail function form materi
TEXT: ,ir( nsiofs.The architect must ook for rational consrructions and forms1,,, (,(lgcs and joints,for Lhe points where suffaces intersect and differ-, rrr rrrrrcrirls meet.These formal deta ls derermine the sensitive tran-, LINE: 49, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: architect must ration form joint point intersect differ meet formal sensit
TEXT: .,r, ),i\ within che lirrger proportions of the building.The detai s estab-,1, rlic lornril rhytlrr, the blr ldings f nely fracrionared sca e.I ), r r l\ cxprcs, wha! dre b.sic idei of ihc dcsiSn requires i! lhe re -, LINE: 50, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: within che proport build wha sic
TEXT: , v.,,ir lr)int ir nrc obiccrrbclon8ins or scpilrirtiof. cension or lightness,, , r,,ni, r) .lrry, fr';rl,iliryl),r,,1. wlidr rlxy ir'1[,m\\1,,1.,ri,]ii,r ,ji{,,( (l{,.orrrion Thcy do'i ! ,lrr'r(( ()r i,r({,r(.rrr l1r,y 11,.r,1 t,, ,,r,ixl,,\r,,ri.1in}t of rlrc wlrdc, LINE: 51, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: light
TEXT: ,,r wlu,lr rlr{,y.rt,r,r fl,,t'ft 1,.rtr.*,r;*S&i .;;''There is a mag ca power in every completed, self-contained creat on.It is as if we slccumb to the rnagic of the fully deve oped architecturalbody. O!r attention is calght, perhaps for the first time,by a dettrl such, LINE: 52, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: mag power everi self creat fulli attent perhap first time
TEXT: as two nais ln the floorthat hold the steelplntes bythe worn-out doorstep. Emotlons well up. Something moves us.Beyond the symbols''Anything goesl' say the doers. l'1aln Street ls almost a rightl' says, LINE: 53, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: two nai hold worn doorstep well someth move beyond symbol anyth say doer aln street almost say
TEXT: Venruri,rhe architect. Nothing works any morc,' say those who sufieifrom the hosti ty of our day and age.These statements stand for con-rradiclory opinions, if not for contradictory frcts.We get !sed to iv, LINE: 54, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe architect noth work say day age statement stand con opinion contradictori get
TEXT: ing with contradictions and rhere are several reason for this:tradltionscrumble, and with chem cu tu.al ideftities. No one seems rer ly to un'dersrand and control the dynamics developed by economlcs and po i-, LINE: 55, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ing contradict sever reason one control dynam
TEXT: tics. Ever),thing merges jnto eve.ything e se, and mass commun cat oncreales an artificial world of signs.Arbitmr ness prevails.Postmodern ife cou d be described as a srate in which everything be-yond our own personal biography seerns vague, blurred, and somehow, LINE: 56, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: tic ever thing eve mass cat artifici world sign ness ife everyth yond person biographi vagu blur somehow
TEXT: unrea.The world is full of signs and info rmarion, which stand for th ngsthat no one fully Lrnderstands becalse they, too. turn out to be mereslgns for other rh ngs.Yet the rea thing remains hiddef.No one ever, LINE: 57, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: world full sign stand one fulli turn yet rea thing remain one ever
TEXT: gets to see lr. Neverthe ess, I anr convinced thnt real things do exjst,however endangered .hey mxy be.There are earlh and water, rhe ightof the sun,lindscapes and vescr.rlofr rnd rlrere ire objecls. mide by, LINE: 58, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: get see es convinc real thing howev hey water rhe sun ire mide
TEXT: man, such as machincs, tools, or nrusicirl inso.( rIcn15. which . c wrrtthcy are, whicl) c for fr.i. v. r clcs for iri ir r s( ic rrcssrgc, rf(l w roseP-.s.r.. ls !( I (.v,l( rirWhen we loo< at objects or buidings tha! seem ro be at peace within, LINE: 59, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: man tool loo object tha seem peac within
TEXT: $emse ves, our perceprion becomes ca rn and du ed.The obiects weperceive have no message for Lrsithey are simPly there. Our percePtlvefaculries grow qu et,unpr-eiud ced,and unacquisitive.They reach beyond, LINE: 60, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: f becom messag simpli grow reach beyond
TEXT: sigfs nnd symbo sithe/ are open, empty. lt is irs f we cou d see some-rhing on whlch we cannot focus our consciousness. Here, in thls per-ccprra vacuum, a memory may surface, a mernory thac seems to lssue, LINE: 61, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sith open empti see cannot focu conscious per vacuum memori may surfac
TEXT: nom rhe deprhs oftime. Nowour observation of the object enrbraces.r p cscfLlment ofthe world n a I its wholeness beca!se there is noth-,+t drir cannot be ufderstood.llrcrc is a power ln the ord nary things of everyday life, as Edward, LINE: 62, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe observ object world whole cannot power nari thing everyday life
TEXT: lloppcrs pnnrngs seem to say. Wc only have to look at chem lonSC,'nrpleted landscap€sr,, i!, tlic presence of cerrain buidLngs has something secrec aboutI ltr./ sccm s mp y to bc there.We do no! pay any special attention, LINE: 63, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: seem say look presenc ha someth pay special attent
TEXT: , , ili,.hr Afd ycr . is vircuir ly nrposs ble to lmaSine che pace where, , / .,r.,,i( wirhour rhem.These buildings ippear ro be anchored firm-r ' ' rli,, ), ound.They g ve rhe impress on of bcing a self-evident parc, LINE: 64, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: che pace build anchor firm rhe impress self evid
TEXT: I r1,,, !i, i)L,n.lings aid $cy sccnr.o be s.ying: ' :rm as yolr see me,,,, I l' ,, r| lio cl'1,,v,., l,,,ro r.rteclcs ictod.srrrsrchb! ldIrts.brildingsrhaq n rlm€, , w ,.,rnl/ rirol)crrrt)r rolr|.f.rnrir.l lrstoryof tlrcLr plce., LINE: 65, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ling aid see
TEXT: I !, r I w w!, L,n.,, lirr(! rL n rir|r v,,,i,,,i r \lr\ Lf,( l, iroii.il s ri r I r .i .,,rl .lr(,1ir.,( ily,,l rli,.,,,r,,v, ,r,,i,irr.r1 rli, ricwbL,.lrt ',"1 ,r',I)'.L,t,t .lr,.rli,,,,i, ,,,) i,',, i,,,,r11 ,1,.,1()JlL!, LINE: 66, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: with the existing sjtuation. For i{the intervention is to llnd lts place, itmust make us see what already exists in a new iight.We throw a sroneinto the water. Sand swirls up and settles again.The stir was necessary., LINE: 67, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: intervent place make see alreadi new throw water sand swirl settl stir wa necessari
TEXT: The stone has found its p ace. But the pond is no longer the same.I belleve those buildings onLy be accepted by their surroundings iftheyhave the ability to appeal to our emotions and minds in various ways., LINE: 68, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: stone ha found ace pond longer build accept surround abil appeal emot mind variou way
TEXT: Since our fee ings and understanding are rooted in the past,our sensu-ous connections with a building must respect the process of remem-bering.sut, as John Berger says, what we remember cannot be compared to, LINE: 69, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sinc fee understand root past connect build must respect process berger say rememb cannot
TEXT: the end of a line.Various possibilities lead to and meet in the act of re-menberi'rg. lnaSes. moods. Io ms. words. sr8n.. or , omDdr i\or\ opelup possibilities of approach.We must construct a r"dial system of ap-, LINE: 70, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: end line variou possibl lead meet act mood word possibl approach must construct dial system
TEXT: proach that enables us to see rhe work ofarchitec.ure as a focal pointfrom diffe.ent angles slnr u ltaneou s ly: hlstorica ly, aesth eticalLy, fu n ction-ally, person" ly, passionately.The tension inside the body, LINE: 71, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: see rhe work ure focal angl alli person passion tension insid bodi
TEXT: Among al rhe drawings prodrced by architects, my favorites are theworking drawings.Worl(ing drawings are detailed and objectve. Cre-ated for th€ craftsmen v/ho are to give the imagined object a materla, LINE: 72, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: among rhe draw architect favorit draw ing draw detail craftsman give object
TEXT: form,they are free of assoclative rnanipulation.They do not try to con-vince and imprcss like projec! draw ngs.They seem to be saying:"Thlsis exactly how it will lool(l'Working drrw ngs rre like anacomical drawings.They revea something, LINE: 73, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: form free tri con like draw seem say exactli work like draw someth
TEXT: ofrhe secrer inncr tcfsron d t tlrc frnrhcd rrclrirccturil body s re-luctnn. lo diyulSc c rIt ,,1 yri r rq, 1r rlrLcn u(,(rrcrry. (lrc f|iction ofmaterials,the inner forces of bear n8 and ho ding,the human work that, LINE: 74, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: bodi rit inner forc bear ding human work
TEXT: is inherent in man made things.Per Kil*eby once dld a brick sculpture in the form ofa house for a Docu-menta exhibition in Kassel.The house had no entrance.lts interior wasintrccessible and hidden. lt remaned a secret, which added an aura of, LINE: 75, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: inher man made thing per kil brick sculptur form hous exhibit hous entranc interior hidden secret ad aura
TEXT: mystica depth to the sculpt!re's other qualities.I thinl( that the hidden structures and constructions of a house shouldbe organized in such a way that they endow the body of the buildingw rh a quality ofinnertension and vibration.This is howvio lns are made., LINE: 76, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: depth sculpt qualiti hidden structur construct hous organ way endow bodi qualiti vibrat made
TEXT: They rem nd us of the living bod es of nature.Unexpected truthshr nry yourh I imagined poetry as a kind of co ored cloud made up o{irorcor ess diffuse met2phors and alusions,which,a thouSh they mlghtlx {,rjoyrb e,were dlfllcu t to associate with a relable view ofthe world., LINE: 77, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: live bod natur unexpect poetri kind cloud made es diffus met associ view world
TEXT: n ! irr rrchitect, I have earned to understand that the oppos te of thlsy{nr lrfrl definition of poetry is probab y c oser to rhe truth.I i work o{ architecture conslsts of forms and contents that conbine, LINE: 78, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: understand definit poetri rhe truth work architectur form content
TEXT: !', ( (,ice r strong fundamentn mood powerfu enough to affect us, itlr,ry t)osscss Lhe qua itles of a work of art.This art has, howevet noth'rrql to do widr inceresr ng confgurations or ori€inality. lt is concerned, LINE: 79, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ice strong mood enough affect qua work art art ha concern
TEXT: wrrlr inli8hts end understand fg, and ibovc .ll with truth. Perhaps po!.rr y r\ Uncxpcclcd n udr. l. I ves in sri llress Arch tecture\ arr sric raskr'. r,, f iv. rlris srill cxpccmncy r fotrn Thc br ldirg i6elf is fever poer- , n r rii,)!(, r rrry posscss sLrbtk qrrrlrtrcr. wlrrr h, rt ccrtr rr rnorrrcnts,, LINE: 80, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: end understand truth perhap f sri arch elf fever
TEXT: ' |,rrt rrr to Lrrrlc[sLrrrr] s()r! rlrl,r| rl,.rr w. wt , r rtr v,r rb c to rrdcr, 'i,,1 r ,tL r,.rl) s w.ry Irl,)r'DesireThe clear, logical development of a work of architecc!re deperds onratlonal and objective criteria.When I permit subjectlve and unconsid-, LINE: 81, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: clear logic develop work object criterion permit
TEXT: ered ideas to lntervene in the objectlve course of the design process, Iacknowledge rhe siSnificance of personal fee lngs in my worl.when architects talk abour their buildings, what they say is often ar, LINE: 82, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: idea cours design process rhe person fee architect talk build say often
TEXT: odds wirh lhe statements of the buildings themse ves.This is probabLyconnected with rhe fact thar they lend to talk a good deal about theritional, thought-out aspects of their worl( and less about the secret, LINE: 83, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: odd statement build f rhe fact thar lend talk good deal thought aspect less secret
TEXT: pi$ion that inspires t.Tlrc design prccess is based on a constant interplayoJ feeling and reaion.The fee ings, preferences.longings,and desires that emerge:nd de-rrind ro be given a form mlrst be contro led by critical Powers of rea, LINE: 84, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ion design base constant feel fee prefer long desir emerg given form led critic power rea
TEXT: irrlfg. buc ir ls our feellngs that tel us whether abstract considemtionsi(.rlly r ng rnre.To a large degree, designinS is based on understandlng.,,,.1 csrib ishlns systems o{ ordenYet I be leve that lhe essential sub-, LINE: 85, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: whether abstract larg degre base system essenti sub
TEXT: .r incc of rhe architectlre we seel< proceeds from feeling and insight. l\,r i(nrr momenrs of intuition resuk from patient work.With the sud'l,r cmcrgcnce ofan inner image,a new lne in a dmwlng, the whole, LINE: 86, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe seel proce feel insight intuit patient work sud inner imag new whole
TEXT: 'i,-.,ltr chirnges and is new y fo.mulated within n fract on of a second. lt' ,., f i powe{u drug were sudden y r.k ng effecr. Everyth ng I knew1,,l, ),. lhotlt the thing I am creating is f ooded by a brigh! new lighr. I, LINE: 87, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: new within second drug sudden knew thing new
TEXT: , rt{, iui.c ioy and passiof,:r)d sonrcdring.leep ins de me seems to af- I', , w ir to briikl rhls horrcl'( ,,'rposing i'r spncc ,,,,,,,(ry \rlxrI rlr( jw,,,n rj,., t)l,,rj,. ,rlrt,\ r,,l rlrrtrrl rrcrr, LINE: 88, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: leep
TEXT: sional bodies in space. Geometry can help us understand how to han-dle space in architecurre.lrur.h -ecrLre. rhere are lwo basic poss brlitie\ oI \pdfirl ( onpo\ll ro1:the closed archlrectural body that isolates space within itsell:nd the, LINE: 89, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: bodi space geometri help understand han space basic poss close bodi space within
TEXT: open bodythat embrales.!l 1T1 olsfage 1!!t r: connected v/ith the,eldless contin!!m.The extension of space can be made visible throughbodies such as slabs or poles placed freely or in rows ln the spatial ex-, LINE: 90, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: open connect extens space made visibl slab pole freeli row spatial
TEXT: I do not claim to know what space really is.The longer I think nbout it,the nrore mysterious it becomes.About one thing, holvever,I am sure:when we, as architecB, are concerned with space, we "re concerned, LINE: 91, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: claim know space realli longer think mysteri becom one thing sure concern space concern
TEXT: with but a tlny paft ofthe infinity that surrounds the earth, and yet eachand every buid ng marks a lnique place in that infinity.With this idea in mind,I start by sl<etchinS the first plans and sections, LINE: 92, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: infin surround earth yet everi mark place infin idea mind start first plan section
TEXT: of my design.I dmw spatia diagrams and simple volumes.I try to vlsu-alize them as precise bodies in space, and I feel it is irnportant to senseexactly how they define and separate an area of interior space from, LINE: 93, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: design diagram simpl volum tri precis bodi space feel defin separ area interior space
TEXT: rhe space thar surrounds them, or how they contain a part of the infi-nite spatial continuum in a kind of open vessel.Bu ldings that haye a st.ong impact always convey an intense fee ing ofrheir spatlaL quality.They embrace the mysterious void ca led space in a, LINE: 94, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe space thar surround contain part spatial continuum kind open vessel impact alway convey intens fee ing qualiti embrac mysteri void led space
TEXT: special way and make i! vibrate.Common senseDesigning s lnvenrng.Whcn lwis stillrt.rtsnnd cr.fts school.we lriedto fo low this plinc ple We Lookcd for i fcw sollLiof io cvcry problem Wc fclr r wis irnpo|tirir (o bc rvlir lt,r .lc N()l urul htcr.li.l I rc-, LINE: 95, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: special way make vibrat common school low problem wi
TEXT: a ize that lhere are basicaly on y a very few architecru€l probiems forwhich a val d solut on has not already been found.n retrospec!, my educarion in desirn seems somewhat a-historical. ourroLe models were the pioneers and inventors of Das Neue Bauen.We, LINE: 96, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ha alreadi found somewhat histor model pioneer inventor da
TEXT: regarded architecrural history as part of our genera education, whichhad little lnfluence on our work as designers.Thus, we frequenty ln'vented what had a ready been invented, and we tried our hand at in-, LINE: 97, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: histori part genu educ littl work design thu readi tri hand
TEXT: venting.he uninventable.Thls l(lnd oftraining in design ls not without its educational value. Lateihoweyer,as practicing architects,we do wellto get acquainted with lhecnormous repository of knowledge and experience contained in the, LINE: 98, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: design without educ valu architect get acquaint repositori knowledg experi
TEXT: history of archicecture. I believe that if we integrate this in our wor<,wc have a better chance of making a genuine contribution of our own.Architecture ls, however, not a linear process that leads more or ess, LINE: 99, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: histori believ integr better chanc make genuin contribut architectur howev linear process lead es
TEXT: logicaly and di.ectly from architectural history to new buildings.On rhesci\rch for the architecture that I envisage,lfrequenty experience sti-f fg moments of emptiness. NothinS can thlnl( of seems to ta ly lvith, LINE: 100, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: architectur histori new build architectur envisag experi moment empti
TEXT: whir I wnnt and cannot yet env sage.At lhese moments,l try to shake,,ff rlre academic l<now edge of archltecture I have acquired because irli,rs slddenly shrted to hold me bac(.This helps.l find I can breathe, LINE: 101, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: whir cannot yet sage moment tri shake academ edg acquir hold bac help find breath
TEXT: ,(,rc freely.l carch a whiff of the old fxmiiar mood of the nventors and''' ', ' D-renl-' orce r8.,,r be(o.,e irv.r ro'llr, ( rcitive act in which i wod< of irchitccrurc conres nto belnggoesl), yorrd aL hisrorical and tcchnicirl knowcdAe. ks focLrs is on rhe dia, LINE: 102, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: freeli whiff old mood act wod rhe
TEXT: , 'llL (, w rl, rhc i5srcs of oor rnr.. At tllc rronrcnt ot its crc.tiof, archi , , r,rc s boonclro ihc prcscrir in.i vi,,y\tn{i., wiylr i(!fc.tsrhcspi, r,n r iv, nr(n .!rl ttv,\,r\,)w,,,r,w,,, r,' rlr' (t1 t,\r (, tr of oLrr tirrrc, LINE: 103, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: r,, rllthrolgh its funcciona form ifd appearance, ics re ation$ p with orherworks of aichitecture, and w rh the p ace where ir stands.The answers to these quest ofs, which I can forn!la.e as an arch tect,, LINE: 104, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: form appear ace stand answer quest arch
TEXT: are imired. Our r mes of change and rransidon do no! permic b g ges,tLres.Trere are ory x few remain ng common va les left upon whlchw€ can build and which we all share.lchus appea forakndof?rchi-rccturc of common sense based on the fundam6nrals rhat wa still <now., LINE: 105, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: chang ge ori remain common left upon build share common sens base still
TEXT: understand.and fee. carefully observe the concrete appearance ofthewor d.and n my buidings ltry to enhance what seems to be va Lrable,rocorrect what is d sturbing, and to create anew whar we feel is nrjssing., LINE: 106, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: understand fee care observ concret appear enhanc creat anew whar feel
TEXT: Melancholy perceptionsEftore Scolas f m Lc Bo/ recounts f fty years of European h story wlthno dialogue and a comp ete unity of place. h consists so ely of musicand the rnorion of peop e nroving and danclng.We r-ernain in the same, LINE: 107, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: melancholi recount year stori dialogu uniti place
TEXT: room with rhe same people throughout, wh le time goes by afd rhedancers grow older.The focus of the film is on rs main characrers. Bu! ir s lhe bal roomwith lts tlled floor and its pareling. the stal s lf the brcl<grolnd, and, LINE: 108, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: room rhe peopl throughout time go grow older focu film main bal floor
TEXT: rhe lions paw at rhe side thar creiles dre film\ defse, powertul atmos-phere. Or is lt th€ orher way aroufd? s r rhe peoplc who endow theroom with its par! cular moodlI as< this question becalse I am convinced thir i good building mLst, LINE: 109, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe lion paw rhe side thar film atmo way rhe endow par question convinc thir good build
TEXT: be capable ofabsorblrg rhe rr.ccrolhuni.rf fc irn(l tliusofr.kfgo|Natur.lly, rr r r s corilctt | 1 r rik,,l rli.,.rrih r,,l.rrI. () r rrrrcr r s.of rnL rrorblr rrrr.Ll 1.,, , . ,,1 v.L ' li ,.,, 1.1 . ,t,,)w,i , L l, LINE: 110, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: capabl rhe
TEXT: tr ';r, ' | f,, ..and brirtle, and of edges Polished by use. But when close my eyes andtry to forget both these physical traces and my own first associatlons,what remalns ls a different imPression, a deePer feelng-a conscious-, LINE: 111, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: edg polish use close eye forget physic trace first differ impress consciou
TEXT: ness of tlme passin€ and an awareness ofthe human lives that have beenacted our in these places and rooms and charged them with a sPec alaura. A. these mornents, a.chitecture\ aesthetic and Practical values, LINE: 112, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ness awar human life place room spec aesthet practic valu
TEXT: sty istic and historical slgnificance a.e of secondary imPortance Wharmatters now is only this feeling of deeP melancholy.Architecture ls exposed to life. lf lts body ls sensitive enough, it can asslrme a quality that, LINE: 113, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sti histor secondari import feel deep melancholi architectur expos life bodi sensit enough qualiti
TEXT: be?rs wltness to the reality of Past ife.Steps left behindWhen I work on a des gn I allow myself co be guided by images a'rdmoods that I remember and can relate to the kind of arch .ectLrre I am_looking fon Most of the images that come to mlnd orl8inate from my, LINE: 114, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: realiti past ife step left work de allow imag rememb relat kind arch imag come
TEXT: subiective experience and are only rarely accompanied by a reme'n-bered architectural commentary While I am designing I r.v to find outlvhat these images mean so that I can learn how to cre:re a wealth of, LINE: 115, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: experi rare architectur commentari design find imag mean learn wealth
TEXT: visual forms and atmospheres.After a certain time, the object I am designing takes on some of thequa ities of the mages I use as models lf I can find a meaningful way ofnterlocl<ing and suPerlmPosing these qualities.the object w llassume a, LINE: 116, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: visual form atmospher certain time object design take use model find meaning way ing qualiti object
TEXT: depth and richness. f lam to achieve this effecqrhe qralilies I am gvingthe design must merge :rnd blcrrd w rh rhc const|ucr onal and forinalstructure of drc fin shcd bui d rrg. For m i r.l consn ucl on iPpcarance, LINE: 117, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: depth rich lam achiev design must merg fin
TEXT: and {( f ctiorr irr no lorrltq !cprrrtc llx'y bclorlll l()ll.rh.r irrdfornrrWhen we look ar the finished building,our eyes,guided by our anayti-cal mlnd, tend to stray and lool( for deta ls to hold on to. But the syn-, LINE: 118, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: look finish build eye cal tend stray hold
TEXT: rhes s ofthewhole does not become comprehenslble through isolateddctais. Everythlng refers to everything.Ar chis momen!, the initial images fade into the background.The models.words,and comparisons thatwere necessaryforthe creation of the, LINE: 119, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: doe becom everyth chi initi imag fade background model word comparison creation
TEXT: w ro e disnppear ll(e steps that have been left behlnd.The new bulldingrssumes che foca position and is itsell ts history begins.I l)clicve that architecture today needs to reflect on the tasks and pos-, LINE: 120, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: step left new che posit histori begin architectur today need reflect task po
TEXT: il)il r es which are inherent y its own.Archirecture is not a vehic e or a.,yrrbolfor rhings that do not be ong to its essence.ln a soc ety thar ce - , ' Ics $e inessentia,archltecture can p!! up a resistan ce, co!nteract, LINE: 121, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: inher essenc soc thar
TEXT: ,.wiste offo.ms and meanings,and spea< its own anguage.1,, |l, vc $:rt the language of arch lecture is no!a question of a specific.,y|, lvoy building ls buir for a spccific usc in a speclfic place and for, LINE: 122, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wist mean languag arch lectur question specif build place
TEXT: .. ! , L( socicl/. My bllldinSs cry to answer the questions thrt emerger' ' r,i r1irs. s rnple fac$ as precisely and critl.ally as .hey can.t*.-t,t,r t'I 1rThe Hard Core of BeautyTwo weeks ago I hrppened ro heai r rad o Program or) the Amer can, LINE: 123, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: cri answer question precis alli hey hard core week ago rad program
TEXT: r,.erW lirrn CarlosW lianrs.Tfe Progranr was entited Thc Hdrd Cor€.l Belruty.Th s phrasc caughr nry atrefrlof.I ike rhe ider that be:tuty has , rid core. afd when rh nk of arch .ecrlrre this associatlon of beru, LINE: 124, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wa cor rhe ha rid core arch
TEXT: ryrrrdr h:r-dcorehasacerta rfamilarty. Thenrachie sathlrrSrr:rrli r\ .o srLp€!f !o!s pxr$. Will ams s suPPosed to have sn d. And I n,r .llrrcly rhin ( I know what he meant lr's a tholtht rhai Peret Hr rd (e, LINE: 125, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: suppos know meant
TEXT: , L,,l(,\ ro.lfeel,whcn re srys rhat bcauty ies I nirLra,grown rhirgs,.Li .lo not c:r.ly irny sigfs or nessages. and whcn he adds thar hc s, , r w ,c. he ca.nor d scover the nrean irg of things for h nsc f. A !rl,.n I ei fcd f-om rhe irdio prosram $3t $€ poetry ofwi am I lrWil ams s biscd on lhe.onvicton tlrit lrere n_e no dcas ex-, LINE: 126, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: grown add thar thing rhe poetri
TEXT: r rc rh ngs rhemse vcs ifd thir llre PUiPose of hls nrt was to ,, li,i 1.,,1oiy peic.ption r{) 1 re wo! d of fii r8s in order to mal(e,L/Vt'j\! wo.t.sid rlrcspcrkc:rlris rik.s prcc seenrngyufemo,,1/ i,,l r(1)icilly..r,i(l ir jprcci!cl/io rlrlq .ir.n rhii hl( reYrs, LINE: 127, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: thir wa order mal
TEXT: !r,,,ilt f,ri.r ,rrri ,,i1, ,( 1 i I , ',l.,t,ti,.i ,1r1,,.r, L,).,ir.,rorswthbui.l-,l r(, ',y (,l.liL,r ,) ,1,'w, ,,,,r!,i r,,, r,, ,|.tol,r Ard to", ,,, ,r1,1.,' r, r,.1,1,., ,,i L, l]rrrt|liivl'",,'l',,.Lrrlir iLL l,L',| i rrlf Lr,)ilr, LINE: 128, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: tol ill
TEXT: | ! i, l, , ,' ,,/r', I I l l..$"h'{, "fno need for art stic additions.The hard core ol beauty: concenrratedBut where are archltecture's fields of force that constitute lts substanceabove and beyond all superficiality and arbitrariness?, LINE: 129, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: need art addit hard core beauti field forc constitut beyond superfici arbitrari
TEXT: Ita o Calvlro te ls us in his lezionj omericdne about the ltalian poer Giacomo Leopardi who saw the beauty of a work of art, in hls case thebeauty of iterature, in $ vagueness, oPenness. and indeterminacy, be_, LINE: 130, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: saw beauti work art case vagu open indeterminaci
TEXT: ( rJ\e rl-r\ e.rves tl-e form oPen lor mar/d{erer rrer'rrSsLeopardls observation seems convinc ng enoush Works or objects ofart thar move us are mu tifaceted;they have numerous and PerhaPs end-less layers of meaning that overlap and interweave, and that chanSe as, LINE: 131, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: form open mar observ work object thar move numer perhap end less layer mean overlap interweav
TEXT: we change our angle of observation.But how is the architect to obtain this dePth and multiPllcity in a bulld-ine of his making? Can vasueness and openness be planned? ls therenot a contradiction here to the claim of accuracy thatWilllams's argu-, LINE: 132, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: chang angl observ architect obtain depth make open contradict claim accuraci
TEXT: ment seems to imPly?Calvino {inds a surprising answer to this in a text by LeoPardi Calvinopoints out that in Leopard t own texts,this lover of the indeterminatereveals a palnstal(ing fidelity to the things he describes and offers to, LINE: 133, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: impli surpris answer text leopard text lover ing fidel thing offer
TEXT: our co nte mplatio n, and hecomes to the conclusion:"This,rhen is whatLeopardi demands of us so that we can enjoy the beauty of the inde-terminate and vaguel He calls for highly rccurate and Pedantic atten-, LINE: 134, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: conclus demand enjoy beauti ind termin call highli pedant
TEXT: rlon ln the composition of each Picture, in the meticulous definlt on ofdetails, in the cho ce of obiects, liShting, rnd atmosphere wirh the aimof attaining the desired vaguenessl Ca vino closes wlrh rhc seemingly, LINE: 135, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: composit pictur meticul cho atmospher desir vino close seemingli
TEXT: paradoxical proclam.tion: The Pocr of tlrc v,tstrc crn orrly be $e poctWhat inrerests me in this story reporred by Calvino is notthe exhorta-tion to precision and patient, detai ed wor< with which we are allfamll-, LINE: 136, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: paradox stori precis patient
TEXT: ar bur the lmplication that richness and multiplicity emanate from theth ings th emselves if we observe them aftentivelyand give them thelr due.App led !o architecrure, this means for me lhat power and multiplicity, LINE: 137, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: bur rich multipl eman observ give due led mean power multipl
TEXT: musr be developed from the assisned task or in other wol.ds,from theth ngs lhat constitute it.John Cage said in one of h s lectures rhat he is not a composer whohcars music in h s mind and then attempts to write it down. He has an, LINE: 138, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: task constitut cage said one lectur compos music mind attempt write ha
TEXT: olher way o{operating.He works out conceprs and structures and thenrrs rhem performed !o find ou. how they sound.when I read this slatement I remembered how we recently deve opedrprolcctfor a therma bath in the mountalns in mystudio,not byform-, LINE: 139, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: way oper work structur find sound read recent bath
TEXT: ,,,11 prelminary images of the building in our minds and subsequently.L,l.,prifg them to the assignrnenq but by endeavorinS to answer basic1 ,,osrions ar sing from the ocation ofthe glven slte, rhe purpose, and, LINE: 140, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: imag build mind subsequ answer basic sing rhe purpos
TEXT: ili(, blllding materials mountain, rock, warer whlch at first had nov ..L,il content in terms of exisr ng architecture.r wrsonlyafccrwe had succeeded inanswering,stepbystep,theques-, {i! poscd by che site, purpose, and material that structures and spac-, LINE: 141, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: materi mountain rock first content term architectur che site purpos materi structur
TEXT: , . ,, ,! Bcd which surprised us .nd wh ch I believe possess the Poten-r.Ll ,,1 r prirnord ir force rhir ieaches dccper than the mere arrange-,,' ,ii ,)l \tylsticilly prcconcc vcd fonfs., ,, , , t,yifu orcscll wid, rhc inhcrcnt liws of corcrcte rhings such as ,, ,r.rr\,r.,.k.ir.lwitcr f conrr{ r,,ni wirl, r lnrikling issi8fmcrt of, LINE: 142, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: believ possess forc mere arrang wid wirl
TEXT: 1,...1 ,1r.!ricofrpprclicrxl,,,ll.,,i{l (,\t)r(\rrrri!(tricofllicpr'rril ind. rw, , rLrtLrr.rlyrlrrtru,r",rtll,rr,.,,l r1,,.,, r'rrrlt ,. r tl ,n tlcveloping an a.ch tecture lhat sets out from and rerurns to real things, LINE: 143, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: set real thing
TEXT: Preconcelved images and stylistcaly Pre-fnbricated forma idioms arequalified only to block access to.his goal.My SwLss colLeagues Herzog and de Melron say that arch tectur€ as asing e whole no longer ex sls todry,and tha! it accotuingly has to be ar-, LINE: 144, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: imag idiom block access goal colleagu say arch whole longer tha ha
TEXT: rficia y $eared in the head of.he desigr€i as an act of precise .h nk-ing.The rwo archllects derive f.om th s assumPtlon their rheory of ar-chirectLrre as a form of thought, an architectLrre thac l suPPose. should, LINE: 145, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ear head act precis ing deriv form thought suppos
TEXT: reflect lls cerebrally conceived wholeness in a sPecial wayI do not ntend to pursue these architecrs'theory of archltecture as aform of though., but only the assumPtion on whlch lt is based, namelythat the wholeness of a bujlding ln the old sense of the master build-, LINE: 146, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: reflect cerebr whole special pursu theori though assumpt base whole old sens master build
TEXT: ers no longer exists.Personally,I stlll believe in the self sufficient. corporeaL wholeness of anarchitecturaL object as the essential. if diffcult,alm of my wod(, if not asa natural or Siven facl.Yet how are we to ach eve this wholeness ln arch tecture at atime when, LINE: 147, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: er longer person believ self suffici corpor whole object essenti wod natur yet ach eve whole arch
TEXT: the d vine,which once gave .h ngs a meanlng,and even reality iiself seemto be dissoving in the endless fLrx oftransitory sgns and imaSes?Peter Handke wrtes of his endeavors to make rexts and descriPtions, LINE: 148, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: vine gave even realiti endless peter endeavor make descript
TEXT: part of the envlronment they re ate to. lf I lnderstand him correctly, Iam confronted here no!on y bythe aL-roo-fam iarawarenessofrhedlf-ficulty ofeliminating artificiality in things created in an arcifcial acl and, LINE: 149, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: part ate correctli fam artifici thing
TEXT: of maklng them part of lhe wor d of ord nary :rfd naruraL rhi'rgs, bur also by lhe be ef drac rlrlr es in rh€ drlr)Bs drcnrsc vcsI belicvc thit if rrtisl c piocesscs st iv. foi wl(,lqi.rss. rhcy r wiys rt, LINE: 150, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: part nari bur also
TEXT: tcnrplloltvclli(.r.irr.rr1rPr(\(:rx(,rkrr rr,rlrir {.,11vlrrr rlic rliirrSsof nature or in the natural envlronment. Consequently,l find that canunde.stand Hand(e,who in the same interview refers to himself as a, LINE: 151, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: natur natur consequ find stand hand interview
TEXT: writer about p aces, when he requir€s of his texts that there shouldbe no additlves in lhem, but a cogn zance of detaiLs and of thelr inter-lin(ing to form a factual complexl'The word Handke uses to designate what I have here ca ed a factu, LINE: 152, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: writer ace text detail inter lin ing form factual word us design
TEXT: al comp ex, name y Sdchverho/t, seems to me to be meanlngful with re-gard to the aim of whole and unadukernted things:exact factua conrenls must be brcught together, bu ldlngs must be thought of as com-, LINE: 153, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: name aim whole thing exact must togeth must thought
TEXT: p exes whose details have been rlghtly identfied and Put lnro i factualrelirlonship ro each otherA factua relationshiplThc point that emerges here is the reduction of the conter.s to realthings. Handl(e aLso speaks, in this contexr, offideLlty to things. He would, LINE: 154, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ex whose detail put point reduct conter also thing would
TEXT: li(c his descriptions, he says, to be experlenced as failhfu ncss to thel ice chey des.ribe and not as s!Pp ementary colorlng.SriLcments of dr s kifd he p me to come to terms w th rhe dissatisfac- ror otlen experence when lcontemPate recent architecture.l fre, LINE: 155, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: descript say ice de ribe come term rhe recent architectur
TEXT: ,lLcntly come across buildings.hat have been desgned with a good,lo,r of effort and a wil ro find a special forrn, and I find L anr Put otf byil,. n Thc .rchirect respofs ble for the blrllding ls not Present, but he, LINE: 156, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: come across build hat good effort find special find put present
TEXT: L.,l(\ to rre un.easLnsly from eve.y detail, he keePs on saying the samerjt.ifd I qric(ly ose nrcrcsl.Good irchire.ture should recelvethe'1, rnf viliror shou d ciible hinr ro cxPc icrrce it ind live in it, bul it, LINE: 157, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: eve detail keep say ose good shou live
TEXT: .. r,Lr (l nor cofstifr y ti\ k ir r fr. Wy, oftdi wondc r s lhc ()l)v ()Lr l)rlr .lll1. L, I rr (rr o I so IircLy t icdlWlit (l() wr lrivc !) |ll(l(,,,ril!l,1i,,, rli1 l).,r ( r r rru! Jrc r l..nrrc i5, LINE: 158, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: ,.,,(.ll,,ir rr,,rI(,|.rI.Irri,LIi ,!' .r 1 , , r ! ) ' . l ' , , , ,' r ' . , , i , l' 11 [rt r'.earch ind si<X and confidence n spaces thar arc realy a owed to bespaccs sPices whose encios n8 wal s and const luenr materia s, con, LINE: 159, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: confid space thar arc spice whose con
TEXT: cavity, emptiness, ight. air, odor. receP!vity, and resonance are hand edw!$ respect and careiI persona y ke the idea of designing and bu d ng houses from wh ch Icrn w rhdraw at the end of rhe forming proccss, eaving behind a bui d- iftrh.rls lsef,draise-vcsasaplacetolive n and a parr of the wor d, LINE: 160, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: caviti empti air odor reson hand respect persona idea design hous end rhe form behind parr
TEXT: of rlr fgs, afd rhat caf manage perfeccly well without nry personal rhe'To nre, buidngs can have a beaurfu silence rhat associate wth at-rrlb!rcs such as compos!re, self cvidence, durabiLty. presence, and in, LINE: 161, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: manag well without person rhe silenc associ compo self presenc
TEXT: tegriry,and w$ warmth and sens!ousness as we lia buid ngthat ls be-ing lrse f, being a bui d ng, not representing any.hin8, i!sc being.Say that it is a c.!de effect, b ack reds.Pinl( ye lows. orange whites, too much as they are, LINE: 162, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: warmth sen ing hin say effect red low orang white much
TEXT: To be anything e se in the sun ight of the room.Too mlch as they ire !o be changed by me.aphor,Too actua, things tha. in being real4al<e any imag nings of them esser ihlngs.This ls the begnning of che poem 8olguer ofRoses in Sunlight by rhe, LINE: 163, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: anyth sun room ire thing tha real che poem sunlight rhe
TEXT: American poe! of qiJlet contctrrp ation.Wa ace ScevensWa Iace Stcvens, I re:rd in the inffodu.r on ro his col ectiof of Poems,acccpted the chi lenge of look ft lofg, prti. rt y..i,ra .xr.r y rnd of d s, LINE: 164, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: poe ace col poem chi look
TEXT: cove_ing rfd rf.lo jti i.l,,t r r ,11 H r 1r,r|,r .,r,r rio( r ProLcsr or ir.o|it) rrir rrt,,i.r r !rr l.,w.,,ri r,,Il .rr1' .'r, rli,y rlr, (!l,r(,\.r0Iany sor.ofconsternation,butthey see< a harmonywhich is possible all, LINE: 165, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rio see possibl
TEXT: thesameandwhic inhlscase-canonlybethatofthepoem.(Calvnogoes a step further a ong thls line ofrhought ln an artemp! to define hisL cerary wod< when he says tha! he has only one defense against.he ossofform that he sees allaround himian idea of icerarure.), LINE: 166, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: step line defin wod say tha ha one defens see idea
TEXT: Reality was rhe goal to which Stevens :spired.S!rrealism,ir appears.didnot rnpress him,for itinvents without discovering.He pointed outthatto porcray a shell playing an accordlof is to invent, nor discover.And so, LINE: 167, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: realiti wa rhe goal spire without point shell invent discov
TEXT: it crops up once again, rhis fundamental thought that I seem to find inWi iams and Hand<e,and that I aso sense in the paintings of EdwardHopper:it s only between the realty ofthlngs and the imtrginarion tha!, LINE: 168, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: crop fundament thought seem find hand sens paint realti tha
TEXT: the spark ofthe worl< ofnrt is knd ed.lf I translare this statement nto archtectural terms,ltel myself tharthe spar( ofthe sLrccessf! building can ony be knd ed between therea ity of the th ngs pertainlng to i. and the imaginarion.And this is no, LINE: 169, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: spark statement term spar build
TEXT: revelatlof to me, but the confirmacion ofsomethinS I continLra y strivefor in my work, and the confirnration of a wish whose roors seem tobe deep ifside me.I But to return to the qlestion on€ finaltime:where do lfind lhe reality, LINE: 170, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: work wish whose seem tobe deep return realiti
TEXT: on which I must concentrate nry powers of lmagin:ition when artemp!-lng to deslgn a buiding for a particular p ace and purpose?One key to che answer lies, I believe, in che words pla.e and "pur-Pose" themse ves., LINE: 171, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: must concentr power particular ace purpos one key che answer lie believ che word pur pose f
TEXT: ln an essay encded Buildng Dwellfg Thifkingl l.. tif Hedeggerwrote; Living imofg drings is the birs c p inc ple of hunraI cxistcncel'wh ch I llndersl:l,if ro rircirr rhit iri rn rbst rcr worldbut ilwrys ii iw,!l.l (,fr[!rt]!.v( r wlrli w,, rr )(.nn,l.or.ii rjtirl, LINE: 172, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: essay live
TEXT: Heidegger: 'The re ationsh p of maf to places afd rhrough places cospaces is based on his dwe ling ln !hem."The conceptofdwe ifg,understood n Heideggerk wide sense of vingand !h nl(ing n p aces and spaces, contains an exact reference to what, LINE: 173, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: place place base ling hem understood wide sens ing ace space exact refer
TEXT: rea ity means to me as an architecr.It ls not lhe rea lty of theories detached from things, i. is .he iea lry ofthe concrere buidlng assignmenr relar ng to che acr or slate of dwell-ng that incerests me nnd Lrpon which I wish to concenrrate my magi-, LINE: 174, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rea mean rea theori detach thing che slate dwell wish magi
TEXT: narive facuhies. lt s the rei ity of bui ding mater a s. stone. cloth, stce ,eather...,and th€ reaity ofthe strucrures luse to consrrLct dre build-ing whose propert es I wish to penetrate with my imaglfation. bringing, LINE: 175, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ding mater stone cloth build ing whose wish penetr
TEXT: nrcaning and sensuousness to bear so rhar che spark of lhe s!ccessfubui d ng may be andled, a bui difg that can serve as a home for man.The .eeliry ofa.ch lectur-e is lhe concrete body n which forms,volumes,, LINE: 176, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sensuous bear che spark may serv home man concret bodi form volum
TEXT: rfd spnces come ln.o belng.There arc no ldeas except in things.From a Passion forThings to the Things ThemselvesIt is important to me to reflect about architecture, to step back frommy daily work and take a lookatwhat lam doing and why Iam doing it., LINE: 177, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: come arc except thing passion thing import reflect architectur step back daili work take lam
TEXT: I love doingthis,and I thinl< I need it,too.I do not work towards archi-tecturefrom a theoretically defined point ofdeparture.for lam commit-t€d to makinS architecture,to building,to an ideal of perfection,just as, LINE: 178, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: love need work toward theoret defin point lam commit architectur build ideal perfect
TEXT: ln my boyhood I used to make things according to my ideas,things thathad to be just right, for reasons which I do not really understand.lt wasalways there,this deeply personaJfeeling forthe things I made for myself,, LINE: 179, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: boyhood use make thing accord idea thing right reason realli understand deepli thing made
TEXT: and I never thought of h as being anythinS special.lt was iust rhere.Today,lam aware that my work as an architect is largely a questforthisonrly passion,this obsession,and an attempt to understand it berter and, LINE: 180, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: never thought special wa today lam awar work architect larg passion obsess attempt understand
TEXT: to r€flne it.And when I reflecton whether lhave since added new imag-.3 and passions to the old ones,and whether I hav€ learned somethingln my training and practice,l realize that in some way I seem always ro, LINE: 181, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: whether sinc ad new passion old one whether learn train practic realiz way seem alway
TEXT: havG l(nown th€ rntuitive core of new discoveries.Plnc6sI llvo and work in Graub0nden, in a farminSvillage surrounded by moun-tnlni. I sometimes wonder whether this has influenced my work, andtlrc thoutht that it probably has is nor unpleasanr., LINE: 182, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: core new discoveri work surround sometim wonder whether ha work probabl ha
TEXT: Wo0ld the buildints I design look dlfferenr if, instead of Iiving inGrnubunden,l had spent rhe past rwonryjlvo ysars ln rhe landscape ofIny /outh on th€ north€rn foothllls of tho Jura mountalns, wlrh rhelr, LINE: 183, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: design look instead spent rhe past rhe landscap north tho
TEXT: 39rol ng h lls and beech woods and the familiar, reassuring vicinity of theurbane city of BaseliAs soon as I begln to think about this question, I reaiize that my lvorkhas been influenced by many places., LINE: 184, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: beech wood familiar reassur vicin citi soon think question mani place
TEXT: When I concenlrate on a spec fic site or p ace for which am Solng todesign a building, when I try ro plumb lts depths, its form, its hlstory,andits sensuous qualities, images of other p aces slart to invade this Proc_, LINE: 185, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: spec site ace build tri plumb depth form sensuou qualiti imag ace slart invad
TEXT: css of precise observation:images of p aces that I know and that oncefrpressed me, lrnages of ordinary or sPec al Places tha. I carry with,,,c irs nner vislons of sPeclfic moods and q!aLltiesi images of rrchitec, LINE: 186, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: precis observ imag ace know ordinari spec place tha carri mood imag
TEXT: rurrl siruations. whlch emanate {rom the world of art, of films, the.ter.sometimes they corne to me unbidden, these mages of places that,rc frcquent y at firs! glance inapProPriate or alien, images of Places of, LINE: 187, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: eman world art film sometim unbidden place fir glanc inappropri alien imag place
TEXT: ,,rlly d fferent origlns.At other ! mes I summon them.I need them, for11 s only when I confront and comPare the essentials of different P ac-(,,.. whcn I a low sinrilar, re ated, or maybe alien e ements to cast their, LINE: 188, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: summon need confront compar essenti differ low mayb alien cast
TEXT: r)ilir of rhc pl.ce of my intervef. on that the focused, mukifaceted im-.i|t, of rhe local esscfce of the site emergcs, a vision tha! reveals con- !, rnns, cxposes lfes offorce,and creates excitement.lt is now that, LINE: 189, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe local site vision tha con excit
TEXT: rl,, l , rilc, . errive groufd :rppears, and the nerwor( of posslble ap-1,,, ),( lics ro.hc specific plrcc cmcrgcs afd trgge|s $e processes and, , , ,.!,nr of dc' gn So I inrnrcr sc nryrclt if rhc plice and rry to inhib r, LINE: 190, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: specif process
TEXT: L ,i ,,/ rrrg ritior. ind irl ([c sr r)c rirr(r I k](t( l).yon.l ir ir rhe world'1 ,'y t)rlicr p r(f!Wli,,,l{(),,r1, i.b\s i l)Lr , rr| r,.,r lji.,,v,l,t),,1 ., !tx'( rl ,rcsclrcc ,,,,,,rtr,ri w,rli rr't,1.,,, 1.r.,'j ,,,!r,,i," It(I II,I1 rr!l,ri, LINE: 191, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: yon rhe world
TEXT: bued with an inner tension that refers to something over and aboveIt seems to be parl of the essence of lts place, and at the same tinre kspeal(s of the world as a whole.When an architectural design draws solely from tradition and only re', LINE: 192, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: inner tension someth essenc place world whole architectur design draw sole tradit
TEXT: peats the dlctates of its site,I sense a lack of a genuine concern withthe world and the emanations of contemporary life. lf a work of archi-recture speaks only of contemporary trends and sophisticated visions, LINE: 193, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: peat site sens lack genuin concern world eman contemporari life work contemporari trend sophist vision
TEXT: without triggering vibrations in its place, this worl( is not anchored in]ls site, and I miss the specific gravlty of the ground it stands on.ObservationsI We were standlngaround the drawingtab etalkingabout a project by, LINE: 194, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: without vibrat place anchor site miss specif ground stand project
TEXT: an architect whom we all hold in high regard. I considered the proiectinteresting in many ways. I mentioned severaL of its specific qualitiesand added that some time previously I had laid aslde my positive prej!-, LINE: 195, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: architect hold high regard consid mani way sever specif ad time previous laid posit
TEXT: dice, which sprang from my high estimation of the architect, and takenan unbiased look at the project.And I had come to the conclus on that,as a whole,l did not rea ly like it.We discussed the possible reasons for, LINE: 196, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: dice sprang high estim architect unbias look project come whole rea like possibl reason
TEXT: my impression and came up wlth a few details wthout arriving at a val-ld conclusion. And then one of rhe younger members of the group, atalented and usually rationa ly minded arch tect, said:"lt is an lnterest-, LINE: 197, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: impress came detail conclus one rhe younger member group usual mind arch said
TEXT: ing building for n I sorts of theoretical and pracrical reasons.The rrou-ble is,it has no soull'Some weeks later. I was s tting oucdoors dr fking cotfee wich my wfeand discussing thc issuc of bu ldings w th i soul.Wc ril<cd about scv, LINE: 198, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ing build sort theoret reason ha week later wa soul
TEXT: eral works ofr(luc(r,rc rlnr wc kncw.r,r{l rlcsrrrl,crl rhcrrr ro crchother. And when we recalled b!ildings that had the characteristics wewere lookingforand pinpointed the r spec alqualties,we became aware, LINE: 199, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: eral work characterist spec awar
TEXT: that there are buildings that we ove.And whereas we knew almost atofce which ones belonged to the spec al cateSory in which we were in-rerested, we found it diffcult to find a common denomlnator fo. their, LINE: 200, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: build wherea knew almost one spec found find common
TEXT: qua i!ies. Our artempt to generalize seemed to rob the individual build-ngs of thelr sp endor.But che subjecc continued to prey on my mind,and I resolved to try andwrite some briefdescriptions oftrrchitectural situations that I love,fraS-, LINE: 201, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: qua gener rob individu build che continu prey mind resolv tri situat love
TEXT: mencary approaches based on peroonal experiences tha. have a conrccrion with my work,and in so doing to move within the same mencalfr:rmeworl( in which I think when I am concerned with generating thecsenr als of a work of my own., LINE: 202, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: approach base experi tha work move within think concern gener al work
TEXT: 2 The main rooms of the sma I mountain hotel overlooked the va ley(ri dre broad slde of the lonS bullding. lt had two adjacent wood-pan-(, cd reception rooms on the sround floor, both ofthem accessible from, LINE: 203, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: main room sma mountain hotel ley broad two adjac wood pan recept room floor access
TEXT: r lic corridor and connected by a doorThe smaller of them looked like a, (,rrforrable p ace in which to sit and read, and the larger one, with five w.l p accd tablcs,was clearythe place in which meak were served.On, LINE: 204, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: corridor connect smaller like ace sit read one five wa place meak
TEXT: l lir f,, rr-lloor chere were bedrooms wich deep,shady wooden balconies,,ri rhc sccond floor mo|e bcdrooms open ng onto terraces.I wi,Lr (l cnioy lookin8 irt rhc open sky ffom the upper rooms,l lholght,, LINE: 205, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: bedroom deep shadi wooden balconi floor open onto terrac open sky upper room
TEXT: .L wr ipproached rhe horcl for drc first irnrc But ihc .houSht of sray', 1i r r o rc of the fir st I oor knnri\.,,,(i, (,](lirlt or wr I fg n the intimarert rbrln,rrt ol t[c rl'rly lrrkorry rrr tl,r, l,rtr, rftrrnn,n rr rrn sccnrcd, LINE: 206, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe first fir
TEXT: There was an openins in the wn a. the foot of the staircase eadlngfrom the upperfloorstothe entrance.A servinghatch ln the earyafter-noons it held frtritflans on white p ates for the guests.The smellofthe, LINE: 207, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wa foot staircas entranc noon white ate guest
TEXT: {resh flans tool< us by surprise as we came down the stairs,and kitchennoi\es 5 r Fd I om tl e hd I ope'r door of the oDDosrre roon-After a day or two we knew olr way around.There were deck chairsstacl(ed along .he side of che hoteL, wh ch adioins the meadow A lit, LINE: 208, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: resh flan tool surpris came stair ope door roon day two knew way around deck along side che hotel meadow lit
TEXT: cle way away, in the haf shadow at the edge of the wood, we noticed awoman sitting ln a decl( chalr, readlng.We Picl(ed up rwo of the chairsand looked for a spot ol our own. During the day we usually dmnk o'rr, LINE: 209, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: way away shadow edg wood sit spot day usual
TEXT: coffee at one of the wooden folding tables on the narrow veranda arthe front.They were hinged at .eSular intervals along the front ParaPer.Good p aces to slr,these small tables clinging to the edge of.he vernn-, LINE: 210, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: coffe one wooden fold tabl narrow veranda front interv along front good ace small tabl cling edg
TEXT: daithe sill was iust the rght height for use as an elbow rest.Conversarions with the other guests !sually took Place nl dusk at theother veranda tab es, placed in a row against lhe facade and Protected, LINE: 211, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sill wa height use elbow rest guest took place dusk veranda tab row facad
TEXT: lrom rhe weather by rhe projecting upper foors.The Frcnch windowto the veranda was opened after rhe evening mer iwe al slretched olrrlegs and oo<ed out over rhe valley.and then satwith a drjnl( by the wal, LINE: 212, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe weather rhe project upper veranda wa rhe even rhe valley
TEXT: rhatwas sti lwarm from the days sunshine.Once,after lhe evening rneal,we were invited to sit at lhe large corner table at the far end ofthe veranda near the enlrance. D!ring the day, that sPot always seemed to be, LINE: 213, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: day sunshin even sit larg corner tabl far end veranda near ring day spot alway
TEXT: used by the regulars ofthe house. never sar nthisniche,whichcaughrthe morning sun ar rhe other end oI $c vcrafd.. On sunny mo.ningsrhere was usu.lly somcone ilreidy s rtinS $ere. rcidifgWhen I rh fk rb(,ut buid rgs drit prov dc nrc witli riit,,ml sPrtiil con, LINE: 214, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: use regular hous never sar morn sun rhe end sunni wa ere con
TEXT: drorisrr)t)n)t)rrr.rorli{ | ,( (. r() rll (]rly,(nr tr.,,,yr.rrvtcs.rri.the way I :m feeling, when I conjure up mental P ctures of works of ar-chltecture thar Sive me space to live and seem ro antlciPate and satis{y, LINE: 215, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: way feel conjur mental work thar space live seem
TEXT: my needs, th s mounlain hote always comes to mnd.ltwas designedby a painter for himself and his guests.3 OLrr first impression ofthe ou!side ofthe restaurant made us hoPefultharwe had foLrnd someth ng betterthan che other places a ong the maln, LINE: 216, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: need alway come painter guest first impress side restaur made che place
TEXT: road of.he tourisr village.We were nor dlsapPointed Enterlng thFoughdre narrow porch,which,as itturned out,was b!iltfrom the nsidebeh fd the main door like a wooden shed, we found ourselves in ;r l:rrge., LINE: 217, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: road villag narrow porch wa main door like wooden shed found
TEXT: lri8h-ceilinged, hall-Lil(e room, its walls and celling lifed wlth dirk, mat.ltle.nr ng wood:regularly placed frames and pane s, waifscoting, conrlc.s, fdented jois$ resting on brackets with ornamental scro ls, LINE: 218, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ceiling hall room wall dirk mat wood regularli frame pane rest bracket ornament
TEXT: Ilie .tmosphere of the room seemed dar<, even Sloomy, un!ll our eyesl',l cw accus.omed to the light.The gloom soon Save way to a mood oflt,,ftleness.The daylight enlering through lhe ralL, rhythmicaly plac€d, LINE: 219, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: room dar even sloomi light gloom soon save way mood daylight
TEXT: wrndows lit up cerca n sections of the room, while other Parts, which,l{l not benefr from the retlecllon of the sht from the paneling, lay w drrwn in half-shadowA! soon:rs lefre_ed the room my eye was caught by an extension ln, LINE: 220, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: lit section room part panel lay half soon room eye wa caught extens
TEXT: ,r ccnrcr of the long outer wnll.:r semi-circular bulSe lirge enoughr,, rcc.,r modire fivc tabes rong the curved wall by.he windows.lli(, foor of rhc room-height fichc wirs of i slightly h gher evel than rl! ,i,\r of rh. hill. No douht rbo'rt l rl,(nshr.$swrswherel, LINE: 221, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: long outer semi circular buls tabe curv wall window room height slightli hill
TEXT: w.L,ir(tl ro st.lwo ()l rlr. rrln,! wr, \r,ll I cc.Trc PcoPc slrtntri,,,i..krLrl)1 {,\\ () rIri,ry rt! 1 ,'1 rri li riL,,.,,i1.L.,,I IprvilclcdrIWe hesitated and finally decided on a rable in the almost empty nrair, LINE: 222, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: final decid almost empti
TEXT: part of the hal.Yet we hesitated again, and lnstead of sitting down wewent in search of service.Afler a while a girl appeared through a doorn the pane ing of the inner wal and led us to a table in the niche.We, LINE: 223, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: part yet sit search servic girl pane ing inner led tabl nich
TEXT: sat down.The s ight feeling of rr tat on occasion ed by ou r arrival soon,b.,-ed.we lrr our f ',, ( Bd,e,re\ rro o,oe,ed son-e w re.Ar the nexr tab e rwo women were ho ding an animated conversation.One of them was speal<ingAmerican, the other Sw ss German. Neither, LINE: 224, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sat feel tat occas arriv soon son tab woman ding anim convers one wa speal german neither
TEXT: of lhem spol(e a word in the other's language.The voices of the peo-p e in the group ar the nexr tab e but one sounded pleasantly far away.I looked around and gradually absorbed the mood.l felt at ease sining, LINE: 225, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: word languag voic group tab one pleasantli far away around gradual absorb mood felt eas
TEXT: in the light of one of the windows, which now seemed taller chan ev-er, and lool(ing into the dar<ened expanse of the ha LThe other guests,busy with their conversrtions and their meas, also seemed happy ro, LINE: 226, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: light one window taller ing dar expans guest busi also happi
TEXT: be sitting therei they behayed naturally, undist!rbed by other peop espresence,with an unconstralned considerate ness fo r .heir fe owSuests,which lent them an air ofdignity. Occupied as lwas with my own activ-, LINE: 227, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sit natur consider ness heir lent air
TEXT: ities, my gaze nevertheless a lghted occasionaly on other faces,and I re-a ized that I lil<ed the feelinS oftheir proximity in this room in whichwe all lool(ed our best.4 Driving a ong a road on .he coast of Ca fornin,we finally arrved at, LINE: 228, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: gaze nevertheless face proxim room best drive road coast final
TEXT: lhe school that was listed in the architectural guide: a spraw ing com-plex of pavi ions spread out over a a.ge expifse of fl:rc rnd high overlhe Pacifc. Barely iny crees, k.rsLic rock rlrrusr ng drrough $e rul{, r, LINE: 229, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: school wa list architectur guid ing plex ion spread high bare cree rock
TEXT: fewhouscs in thc inrnrcd rtc vic Iity.Thc rows olrill,s rSle srory bu ldings widr flir. t,,(,l.,rint roo15 wcrc corn.(rr.l l)y i\|l,rlr prths cov-ered by concrete slabs on steel columns, and the regular arrangement, LINE: 230, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: row corn concret slab steel column regular arrang
TEXT: of the paths and pavilions v/hich appeared to accommodate the class-rooms v/as periodicaily interrupted by buildings with tr specialfunctionatwhich we could onlyguess.llwas duringthe schoolhoLidays and the, LINE: 231, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: path pavilion accommod class room interrupt build could
TEXT: complex y/as deserted.The windows were set high up in the wals andit was hard to see into the c assrooms.We came across a large metadoor to a side courtyard, which seemed to belong to one of the c ass-, LINE: 232, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: complex desert window set high wa hard see came across larg side courtyard belong one
TEXT: rooms. lt was s ightly open, and we man:ged to catch a glimpse of aroom with desks and a blackboard. lt was plainly furnished.The wa lsand rhe floor showed signs of intensive use, and the daylight encering, LINE: 233, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: room wa open man ged catch glimps desk blackboard wa plainli furnish rhe floor sign intens use daylight
TEXT: through the hiSh windows lenr the room an atmosphere that was bothconcentrared and genrle.Prorection from the sun,shelter from the wlnd and rain,an inrelllgent ap'proach to the issue of lighting,I thoLrght,and I was aware that I had by no, LINE: 234, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: hish window room atmospher wa sun shelter rain issu light wa awar
TEXT: meansSrasped allthe specific qualities ofth s architecture-the srraighrforward simplicity ofl!s sr.ucture,fol. example,which was reminlscent ofrndustrial precast concrere co nstructlon s, or its spac;ousness,or its lack, LINE: 235, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: specif qualiti architectur simplic exampl wa precast lack
TEXT: of rhe pedantic refnements rhat abound ln schools in Switzerland.l4y vkit had b€en worthwhile. Once aga n,I resolved to begin my workwith the s mple, praccical rh ngs, ro make these ihlngs big and Sood and, LINE: 236, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe pedant abound school aga resolv begin make big
TEXT: l)ciurifu, Lo make thcm the star.in8 point of the specific fom, like arirster bu der who underslands his metierl5 Ar thc itc of ci8lrrccn,wli.,, I wis ipprcrclrlfg rhc efd of my apprenr,(slrp irs i.ibincurri<cr,l r)r,l, ry fir\r \, 1.!csitrc(l picccs of fur-, LINE: 237, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: make star point specif like wi fir fur
TEXT: rirrrcThcrrislcr(,rl)o{,r,ri.rk|, ,), {lit,(l(,i1 1l(,r( ,,ii,trrl rlrcformofr,\1 ,)l r1tr 1,,,,,r1,,,,,,,.r1(,,r,'1,, .1,, t' , !ll ., ,li)i' l(,1 rr ,li,l for,'..n Ffl ffi FI&1 fr F,th; ffs HtBT,l: H H, LINE: 238, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: lit
TEXT: Fl rii' ilI:flidiIcvcn l<e the wood we used for rhe besr p ecesrwirlnuc. I chose lighr-coored ash for my bed and clpboard,and I made drem so that theylooked good on allsides,with tre sxme wood ard rhe same carefulworl(, LINE: 239, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wood use rhe chose ash bed made good wood rhe
TEXT: bicl( and front.I disregarded the us!al pra.tice of expending ess rlmeand care on rhe bac< becaLse no o1e ever sees it afyway At long lxstwas able to round off the edges only s ghdy withouc be ng con ecled,, LINE: 240, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: front tice es care rhe bac ever see long abl round edg con
TEXT: running the sandpaper swiftly and liShtly ovo thc cdgcs to sofrcf thcsharpncss without los ng the elegafce ind fifeness of r ic ncs I bir.,l/rouched the corners where three edges meer lfrrcd th. noc,r ol r r., LINE: 241, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: run sandpap without corner three edg
TEXT: clpboard into thc franre rt the front w.h . nnxinr,rr ol 1,, r,t rhrr r|Lratitclosed almosthermellcally,wi$ r gentlc fr ctlorii .s \r.i n,,ri,lr barely audib e sound of escaping aiLI fe .8ood worl(ing on this cupboard. l.irk ng rhc pro. lrly f rrir)t t() ril l, LINE: 242, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: front bare sound ing cupboard irk pro
TEXT: rnd exacc shapes to form a who e, a conrp erc oblc.r drit cor rcspofd.dro my iffer vislof,tiigSe cd in nre a state ot rrrefse co.cenr_ir on.rnd' fr .,€dpe(eof t'. '(r- rdd-d I rp lr'6 The der s rhe fo owing:a ong,naffow bloc< ofbasa r stone project ig. good drree stories out oftre ground.The block is hol owed orr on, LINE: 243, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: shape form cor state rhe owe bloc stone project good stori ground block
TEXT: , I sides until on y a ong middle -ib and a nunrber of n'ansverse, hor /,lrnlribs cmilf.Sccf lf cross scction.tlre ima8ned bloc( row loo(sl, (! r geomerr cirl o ee oi dre errer T wirh three hor zonta srrokes:a, LINE: 244, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: side middl cross bloc row loo three
TEXT: rrori. oblccr of rrc o'rts<lrrs of rhc O nTow r dirk. r nostbick, rat.|,,r,,,rt r,,(l rr ,( ,).,, h.,r,,)tin.l ipitrr srrr.nrrc,,1 .L rri.. \k),y hrrl,lL 1 ,, ,,1.,.1,i,"1 (,,,i, rr.l,r r',,,,\.v,!'.1i,!lwr,,r{)! ,,,l.w,rli. l.', ,Lr , 1, ,.,.111 w,! L),,,i, r/1,., LINE: 245, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: dirk rat tin
TEXT: ,'jrrirrl", rirli, rli r ',, ,,, ',r, I t,'tlthe material.We hand e th s stone sculpture with the utmost care, foreven at this stage it is already almost the whole buildinS We design thejoints of the boards in whlch it is cast like a fine network coverlng al, LINE: 246, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: materi hand stone sculptur utmost care stage alreadi almost whole design board cast like fine network
TEXT: rhe surfaces wlth a regular pattern,and we are carefLrlto ensure lhat theioints arisins duringthe section-wise casting ofthe concrete wil dis:P-pear into the network.The thin steel frames Proiecrlng from the stone, LINE: 247, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe surfac regular pattern ensur section wise cast concret di pear network thin steel frame stone
TEXT: il(e b ades in the middle ofthe door are intended to hold the wings ofthe doors.and lighrwe ight Slass and sheet metal Panels are inserted be-rween the stone consoles of the floor slabs so that the intermediate, LINE: 248, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ade middl door intend hold wing door sheet metal panel insert stone consol floor slab intermedi
TEXT: spaces between the .ibs become rooms !ike glazed verandasOur clients are of the oplnion that the careful way in which we treatour materials, the way we develoP the join.s and trans tions from oneelement ofthe building to the orher,and the Precision of detail lo which, LINE: 249, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: space becom room glaze client care way materi way develop join build precis detail
TEXT: we aspireare a Itoo elabo rate.Th ey want us to Lrsponents and con struc.ions, they do not want us to make such h gh de-mands on the craftsmen and technicians who are co laborating wlth us:they want us to bu ld more cheaply., LINE: 250, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rate want con ion want make craftsman technician want cheapli
TEXT: When I !hink o{ the alr ofquality.hat the building cou d eventually cma-nate on its appointed site in five yeare o. five decades,whe'r I conslderthat to the peop e who will encounter lt,the only thlng thal will count, LINE: 251, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: hat build eventu site five five decad encount count
TEXT: is wha! they see,thal whlch was finally constructed, I do no. find it sohard to put up a resistance ro our clients' w shes7 I .evkited $e ha I wlth the nichc n lhe end wa I thrt I liked so muchand which I t-icd ro describc c licf I was fo orrScr nric whcthcr rhe, LINE: 252, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wha see wa final find put resist client end wa rhe
TEXT: floor of rhc rii(h. wrs ici ly on r hithcr lcvc rli., r drc icst ot the hrllIt wis ri.n N,,r wr! rli( ( 1ff( ui( c r r l)r 111,r,,,\( li, rw{!ri rlir rii.hc rrr(lthe ha I ns great as I remembered ir, afd I was disappointed by the dull, LINE: 253, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: floor wi great wa disappoint dull
TEXT: ghr on the wall paneling.This djfference between the rea ity and my memor es did not surprisenre. I have never been a good observer, and I have never really wnntedro bc.I I ke absorblng moods, moving in sparial s tuarions,and I am satis-, LINE: 254, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wall panel rea never good observ never realli mood move
TEXT: fcd when llm able ro reta n a feeling,a sLrong genera impression fromwhich can later extract detalls as from a palnt n8,and when lcan won-( cr whar t was rh:t triggered rhe sense of prorecrion, warm$, light, LINE: 255, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: abl feel genu impress later extract whar wa trigger rhe sens warm light
TEXT: r.ss, or spac ousness thai has stayed in my nremory.when ook backlic fiis itseems impossible to dist nguish becween archilecture and ife,licrween spatial siruations and the way I experience them. Even when I, LINE: 256, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ha stay imposs ife spatial way experi even
TEXT: , ,)hccntra.e exclusive y on the architecture and try to undersrand wharI l,.,ve seen, my perception of it resonates in whar I havc cxpcriefccd rl$rs colors what I have observed. l"lem ories ofsimilar exper ences, LINE: 257, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: exclus architectur tri seen percept whar color
TEXT: r ,,, st the r way in, too, and thus mages of related ar.h tectural situa',ris ovcr ap.The difierence in the floor leve s of the niche and the ha I, ,, ( well hnve existed. Perhaps it even d d exist once and was ater re', LINE: 258, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: way thu relat floor nich well perhap even exist wa
TEXT: Lr )vlrl? Or,lf it was never there, perhaps l. shou d be added, as an im-)r ,vrrircnt to the room? l.l,,w lrrvc fallen back into my io c as an architcct, and I reaLlze once,i ,,, 1rcw ,,,uclr I e,rioy working w th my o d passions and rnages, and, LINE: 259, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wa never perhap shou ad room fallen back work passion
TEXT: ' ,w r[.y hc p me ro find whit I .m looking foiThe Body of ArchitectureObseryations, impressions I I was interviewed by the curator ofthe museum. He tried to soundme out by means of clevei unexpected questions.What did I think, LINE: 260, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: find whit look bodi impress wa curat museum tri mean unexpect question think
TEXT: abour dr(hIecLUre. whar was rrrportanL to rre aboL! .ny worl-thesew€re the thinSs he wanted to know.The tape recorder was on.I did mybest. At the end of the interview. I realized that I was not really satis-, LINE: 261, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: whar wa know tape record wa end interview wa realli
TEXT: fied with my answers.Lnter that evening,l talked to a friend aboutAki Kaurismekil latest film.I admire the director's empathy and respect for his chancters. He doesnot l(eep his actors on a leashihe does not exploit them to express a, LINE: 262, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: answer even friend latest film admir director empathi respect actor doe exploit express
TEXT: concept,but rather shows them in a lightthat lets us sense th€ir diSnity,ind their secrets. Kaurismeklk art lends his films a feeling of warmth,I cold my colleague and then I knew what it was I would have liked, LINE: 263, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: concept rather show let sens secret art film feel warmth cold colleagu knew wa would
TEXT: ro have said on the tape this morning.To buid houses like Kaurismekimakes films thatt what I would li<e to do.2 The hotel in which I was staying was remodeled by a French star de-slgner whose work I do not know be.ause I am not interested in trendy, LINE: 264, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: said tape morn hous like film would hotel wa wa star whose work know interest
TEXT: dcslgn. gut from the moment I entered the hotel,the atmosphere cre-iEed by his architecture began to rake effeci Artlficial ight illuminateddro halllil(e a siage.Abundanr muted lL8ht. B right accen ts on the recep-, LINE: 265, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: gut moment hotel atmospher architectur rake right
TEXT: rlon desks, ditferent kinds of naturil slone ln niches n the wall. Peo-plo iscending the graceful stairway to tlro orclrclinS gallery stood outiSnlns! a shinlng golden will. Abov6, ofio corld slt ln one of lhe dress, LINE: 266, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: desk kind slone nich wall grace stairway galleri stood golden one dress
TEXT: 5lc rcle boxes ove look ng thc ha I and havc a drinl. or r snrc (.There areonly good scats here. ChristopherAlexander,who speaks n Pdft.r,ldnguo.qe ofspatialsituarons n whlch p.op c ifsrinctlvcly fce good,wo!d, LINE: 267, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: box look good scat good
TEXT: hrvc bccn p cased.Isxt in a box overoo<ing the hall,a specrator,fcel l.! rhat was pirrtofrhc designcr sstagcsct.l l<ed loo(jn8 dowf onrhc .ctiv ry bc ow wlrere people came ind went, entered ind ex red., LINE: 268, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: case box ing hall wa loo dowf peopl came went red
TEXT: Ie r I (rf.erstood why the aichitecr is so suc.cssful.3 She had seen a smallhoL se by Fian. Lloydwrght drar nrrdc aSrextinrpress on on hcr, said H. lts sosma and iitimale, thecel lngs so LowThere was a riny bmry with special ighr ng and a ot of, LINE: 269, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: seen said wa special
TEXT: de.orarive arch rectLral e cmcfrs.and tlre wro e house nrxde a slfonghorLzonta impress on which she had never exper iefced bcforc.The oldlady was stil lving rhcrc.Thc-c was lro need for nre to go and see the, LINE: 270, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: arch wro hous impress never wa wa need see
TEXT: housc, I rhought. (llew lust whft she mearrt, and knew th€ f€cling of''home rhat she descrLbcd.4 The member of $e jury wc c showf buid fts by rrch cects com-peri'rg for an architecrural award. I srL d ed the documents dcso lbing, LINE: 271, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: lust knew cling home member juri peri award document
TEXT: a smalL red house n a rural setting, a barn converted fto a dwe ngwhich lrad beef en arged by rhe irchire.r and dre ifhab nnts.Thc cxrens on was a success,l rho!tht.Akholgh you co! d see wh.r ha.l been, LINE: 272, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: small red hous rural set barn convert beef rhe wa success rho see
TEXT: done ro rhc lrolsc beneath the s..ldle iool rhe .hinge wrs we lnodeled afd nregrared.The window opc r fgs wcrc scn!li vcly p icc.l.l-lrcold and rhc few werr. bi iir(e.l ]r.l h nFnoLr.Tlrc rcw pirrs of c, LINE: 273, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: done beneath rhe hing window
TEXT: ho!se. . n.n .ee,n fti b. iiyrrt lri i(w L,r r .irlif i,i, t,i, t (n rli.ncwwlrol, l N,,rl[,r,'" ,'rli,,it..,, i,,| llir..ll)f l,.,t) ,,,,, ,,,i,,\,1,,1 ,,,,r, r,,ii, ,t ,,',' ', "l' l'.',,',.1t,. - .:, LINE: 274, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: :t i'l,i.,Iiproach atluned to crafrsmanship.We agreed that we could not awadth s conversion a prize for design forthat,itsarchitecrura cialmslveretoo modest.Yet I enioy th nl(ing bacl( on the sma red house., LINE: 275, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: agre could convers prize design modest yet ing sma red hous
TEXT: 5 ln a boo< about timber construct on, my attention was caught byphotographs of huge areas ofclosely packed tree trunks f oating on wideexpinses of water.I : so li<ed the plcture on the cover of the bool(, a, LINE: 276, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: boo timber construct attent wa caught huge area tree trunk water cover bool
TEXT: co lase of lenslhs of wood arransed in layers li(e a cross section.Then!merous photos of wooden buildings, despite the fact that they werearchitecrurally commendable,were less appea ing. have no. bui rwood-, LINE: 277, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wood layer cross section photo wooden build despit fact commend less ing
TEXT: en houses for a long time.A young coleague asked me how I wou d go about bu lding a house ofwood after wor<ing for some years wlth stone and concrete, steel andglass.At once,lhad a menca image of a house-sized block of solid t m-, LINE: 278, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: hous long time young hous ing year stone concret steel imag hous size block solid
TEXT: ber,a dense volume made of the biological subs.ance of wood,ho.izorcaly layered and precisely hollowed out.A house il(e this would changeits shape, would swel and conrract, expand and decrease n height, a, LINE: 279, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ber dens volum made biolog sub wood layer precis hous would shape would expand decreas height
TEXT: phenomenon that would have to be an integral part of the deslgn.lYyyoLrng co eag!e told nre that in Spanish, his mother tongue, rhe wordswood, mother, and materia were simiar: modera, modre, moterio.We, LINE: 280, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: phenomenon would integr part told mother tongu rhe mother
TEXT: star.ed ta king abolt the sensuous qualities and cultural slgni{icance ofthe elemental materials of wood and stone. and abou! how we couldexpress these ln o!r buildings.5 Central Pad< Sorrh, NcwYor <, r hall of thc firsr flooi lt was cvcfing., LINE: 281, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: star king sensuou qualiti cultur element materi wood stone build central pad hall wa
TEXT: Before me,framed bythe soarirS,sh r)ir)g,scony c ry, iy.hc l)lgc wood-ed reclinglc of rhc pir ( Grcir citics c brsc.l on trcrr. clcir,wcll orderc.i cof ccp(r. l rli(nr)t I l hc r ccrrrrJtL rr' t, It|r r,'1 rlrr !rr cer\ tlic di, LINE: 282, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: frame wood pir
TEXT: agonal line of Broadway, the coaslal lnes of the perjnsu a.The bu ld-ifgs, pacl(ed densely ln cheir right angled Srid,looming up in rhe sky,ln-d vidualisric, in love with themselves, anonymous, ieckless,tamed by the, LINE: 283, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: agon line broadway dens cheir right angl loom rhe sky love anonym
TEXT: straltjacl(et of the grid.7 The former townhouse looked somewhat lost in the park- lke expanse.lrwas rheonLyblilding n thatpartof thetown co have s!rvvedrhe destruction of the Second world War Previously used as an em, LINE: 284, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: grid former somewhat lost park expans destruct second world war previous use
TEXT: bassy. ir was now being en arged by a third of ics orlginaL size accordingro rhc plans of a competent architect. Hard and se f-assured, che extens on stood slde by side with the old buildinS:on lhe one hand a hewn, LINE: 285, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wa third size plan compet architect hard assur che stood side old one hand hewn
TEXT: 'rone base,stucco fatades.and balusrrades,on.he other a comprcssedn)ode[n annex made ofexposed concrete,a resn-ained,d sc plined vo -rnre rhat alLrded to the o d main bullding while maintaining i d scifct,, LINE: 286, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rone base stucco ode annex made concret main
TEXT: (lr ogic distance in terms of lts design.I fo!nd myselfthinl(ing about the old castle in my vilage.lt has been al-lcrcd and extended many times over the centuries, developing grad!-r ly fr-om a c uster offree-stand ng bui dings lnro a closed complex wl!h, LINE: 287, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: distanc term design ing old castl ha extend mani time centuri grad uster stand ding close complex
TEXT: !, |rrer courlyard. A new arch tectural whole emeEed at each stagei,frrs dcvc opment. Historlcalincongruities were not architectural y re-, .rdcd.The old was adapred to .he new or the new ro rhe o d, in the, LINE: 288, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: new arch whole architectur old wa new new rhe
TEXT: rrtrcsr ofthe conrplete,integrared appeamnce ofits latest stage ofevo-L r on On y when ore ifa yzcs thc s!bstance of che walls, strips them1)f r lir r p rsr€r, rnd cxflrincs dre i iolfls do drcsc old blildings reveal, LINE: 289, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: latest stage ore che wall strip old reveal
TEXT: L !'" ( ("irP .! Scncsisllli,,i1i,,{,(!rli{,.xliil)iri,)rl[vrL,,r(),i,, irt i lwi.(,,rfro]rrcdby5oP,,)l w.,ll\.|.rrr({l I'Ir rr ,. ,.Lrr II r '. 1,,,, ,,,,1r.r,1 I, iyfLrly r,,l}llifrlbattens and ropes hanging,leaning,fl oatinS,or pulling,taut or protecting-, LINE: 290, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rope hang lean taut protect
TEXT: The composition disclaimed the rlght-angle and soughc an informal bal-ance.The architecture made a dynamic impression, symbolizing move'ment.lts geslures filled the avaiable space,wanting to be looked at, to, LINE: 291, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: composit angl inform bal architectur made dynam impress move fill space want
TEXT: mnke their marl.There was hardly any room eft for me.I fo lowed thewlnding path indicrted by the architecture.ln the next pavilion I met with the spacious elegance of the BraziLianmaster Niemeyer! sweeplnS lines and forms. Once again, my interest, LINE: 292, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: marl wa hardli room eft path architectur next pavilion met spaciou eleg line form interest
TEXT: lyas captured by the large rooms and the emptiness of rhe huge outdoor spaces in the photos of his work.9 A.told me she had seen many tattooed women on the beach ofa smallseaside resort in rhe CinqueTerre region, a holiday destination visited, LINE: 293, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: larg room empti rhe huge outdoor space photo work told seen mani woman beach resort rhe region holiday destin
TEXT: mainly by ltalians.The women underline the individualty of their bod-ies, use them to proclaim their ldentlty.The body as a refuge in a worldwhich would appear to be flooded by artificial signs of life.and in which, LINE: 294, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: mainli woman underlin bod use proclaim bodi refug would appear flood artifici sign life
TEXT: philosophers ponder on yirtual rea iry.The human body as an object ofcontempomry art.Surveys,disclosuresthat seek knowledge, or the human body as a fetlsh of self-assertionthat can only succeed when looked at in the mirror or seen through, LINE: 295, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: philosoph ponder rea human bodi object art survey seek knowledg human bodi self succeed mirror seen
TEXT: the eyes of others?This autumn lvisited the room with the exhibltlon ofcontemporary ar-chitectula proiecls from France.l sawshiningobjects made of I ass,gen-tle shapes without edges.Taut,elegant curves round ng offthe 8eometri-, LINE: 296, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: eye autumn room made gen shape without edg taut eleg curv round
TEXT: calvolumes ofthe objects arspecifc poinLs.The I lines reminded me ofRodln s drawings of nudes :rnd endowed drc oblccis with the q!r l.y ofsculpcures.Architecruml nrodc s. Modcls BoiLrtihrl bodics,.clcbmr ons, LINE: 297, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: object line draw nude on
TEXT: of s!l.f:rcc lcxtrrr, ,J<in,lrcr nrct c iri(l fl,rwlcs\ cnrl)rr( ru' I lic bodrcs.I 0 A glass partition divided up rhe length of the rarrow corridor of theold hotel.The wing ofa door below, a firmly fixed pane ofSlass above, no, LINE: 298, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: glass partit divid rhe length corridor hotel wing door firmli fix pane
TEXT: frame,the panes c amped and held ar the comers by two metal clasps.Normally done, nothing special- Certain y not a design by an architect. B!! l(ed the doorwas it because ofthe proporrions ofthe rwo panes, LINE: 299, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: frame pane comer two metal clasp normal done noth special certain design architect pane
TEXT: of glass, the form and position of the clamps, the gleaming of the I ass I che muted co ors of the darl( corr doi or was it because the upperpnne of g ass, which was tal er rhan the average-height s$/ing door be-, LINE: 300, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: glass form posit clamp gleam che wa wa tal averag height ing door
TEXT: ow it, emphaslzed the height ofthe corridor? did notknow.ll lwas shown some photographs ofa complicated buidinS. Differentareas, planes,and volumes seemed to overlap, s anting and erect,encap-sulated one wlrh n the orhenThe bullding,whose unusual trppearance, LINE: 301, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: height corridor shown photograph complic plane volum overlap erect one whose unusu
TEXT: Save me no clear indication as !o ics function, made a srrangely over-loaded ard torru.ed impresslon. Somehow, it seemed two-dimens ona.For I moment I thought I was lool(ing at a photograph of a cardboard, LINE: 302, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: save clear indic function made load somehow two ona moment thought wa ing photograph cardboard
TEXT: model,colo llly painted.Lateiwhen I earnedthe name of thearchi-rect, was shoc<ed. Had I made a mista<e, a prematurej ignorant i!dg-ment? The architecrs name has an international r n8, his fine archtrec- tlral draw ngs are we I known, and his wrjtten starements about con-, LINE: 303, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: model paint name rect wa made ignor name ha intern fine draw known con
TEXT: temPorary archirecture,which also deal with ph losophical themes, arewidely pub ished.l2 Atownhouse ir l,lanhatlan wi$ a Sood addiess,i!st comp ered.Thenew faeade in rhe ine of $e sn ccr of build ngs srood out disl fctly. lf, LINE: 304, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: temporari also deal theme pub rhe build
TEXT: the phoroSr:rphs, rhc nir! r sroncsliicd,srnoundcd byshss, oo(cdL l<c a brckdrop ln cr iLy.il,chcrdewis lior. ( | i()|ir, irorc iIrcgrircdin irs sLllrr ,i, |ti, ljy Ii!llrrr l() (l r (r/( v,l,r\1,(!iwlrr,,, l(,,ir{,rc.l lhc, LINE: 305, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: holrse.The quality of rs construction captured my attention.The archi-cect received us.took us into rhe vestibu e, and showed us from roomro room.The rooms were spacious,their order ogica.We were eager, LINE: 306, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: qualiti construct attent receiv took rhe room room spaciou order eager
TEXT: to see each succeeding room, and we were not disappointed.The qual-ity ofrhe day lght enterlng through the glazed rearfagade and a sl(ylightover the stairs was pleasant. On all the floors, the presence of the lnr -, LINE: 307, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: see succeed room disappoint day glaze stair wa pleasant floor presenc
TEXT: male back yard arolnd which the ma n rooms were grouped was per-ceptible, even at the heart of the blr lding.The architec! spol(e n respectflrl, amicable terms of the clien.s, thefewly installed resldents, of their understand ng of his work, of h s ef, LINE: 308, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: male back yard room group wa per even heart amic term understand work
TEXT: forts to comply with thelr requiremenrs, and o{ their ciitic sm of sorncimpracLica aspects which he subsequenty improved. He opened c!p-bo?rd doors, owered rhe large scrim blinds, which suffuscd thc livifg, LINE: 309, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: fort compli aspect door rhe larg scrim blind
TEXT: room wirh a mellow light,showed us fo dlng partitions,and demonstrac-ed huge swing doors tha! moved no se ess y berween rwo pivors, closfg rlghtly and pr€clsely. Every now and then, he touched the surface of, LINE: 310, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: room mellow light partit huge swing door tha es everi touch surfac
TEXT: some marerial or ran his hands over a handrai , a joint in the wood, $ecdge of a glass pane.l3 Thc towr I was vlsitng had a partic! arly attractjve neighbor-rood. Bu dlngs from lhe l9th cenlury and rhe rurn of the centu, LINE: 311, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ran hand joint wood glass pane wa neighbor rood rhe
TEXT: ry. so d voumes placed alofS the streets and squares, constructed,)f srone xnd brick. Nothing excep! onal. Typically urbaf.The publicprcnrises on rhe ow.r floo s frccd thc rord, rhc dwe lngs ard offic- .i rbove reffeired bch r.l prorccr vc fi(r.l.s, hidifg pr vrte spheres, LINE: 312, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: street squar brick noth typic rhe sphere
TEXT: l{rli nd prcstisious frrg, rr,,ryrr,,r.. lrrr.r r Ir y (lvorccd frorn rl,. l),,lni{ \1,,({, wli(li lr!t.,ri wr r lrr ,1 ,,111. ,r rr. Ioot oI tlrcI had be€n told that a number of architects lived and worl(ed ln chis, LINE: 313, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: told number architect live chi
TEXT: nejghborhood. I remembered this a few days later when I was lookingat a new neighborhood nearby.designed by welL <nown archltects,and Ifound rnyselfthinklng about the unequivocal backs and fronts ofthe ur-, LINE: 314, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: day later wa new neighborhood nearbi design well unequivoc back front
TEXT: ban s!.Lrctures,the precisely art cula!ed public spaces,the graciously re-srra ned fatades and exactly fittlng volumes for the body of the town.l4 We spent years developing the concept, the form, and the work, LINE: 315, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ban precis art public space gracious exactli volum bodi town spent year concept form work
TEXT: ng drawings ofour sto ne-bu ilt thermal baths.Then construction began.I was standing in front of one of the first b ocl(s that lhe masons hadbuilt in stone from a nearby quarry. I was slrrpr sed and irritated. Al-, LINE: 316, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: draw thermal bath construct wa stand front one first mason stone nearbi quarri wa
TEXT: though everyth ng corresponded exacry with our plans, I had not expected this conc!rrent hardness and softness, lhls smooth yet ruggedquality,.his ridescent gray-8reen presence emanating from .he sqLare, LINE: 317, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: though plan hard soft smooth yet gray reen presenc
TEXT: stone blocks. For a moment, I had the fee ing that our proi€ct had es-caped us and become independent because it had evolved nro a materia entity that obeyed irs own laws.l5 I vislted an exhibltion ofwork by Mere! Oppenheim at the Guggen-, LINE: 318, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: stone block moment fee ing cape becom independ entiti law mere
TEXT: heim MLrse!nr.The techniques she uses are s.rll(ingly varied.There isno continuous,consistent style. Neverthe ess, I experienced her way ofthinking,herwayof lool(ngattheworldafd of interveningin !rhrough, LINE: 319, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: techniqu us vari continu consist style es experienc way
TEXT: her wod(,as coherent and integra. So there is probably no poift n won-derlng iust what it is that slylisr cilly links thc fanro!s fur cup and thesnal(e made up ofpieccs ofcorl.Dldn r Meretoppenhcim once snythrt, LINE: 320, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wod coher probabl link fur cup made
TEXT: every dea nccds its proper fonn ro bc cffcctivc?fIiTeaching Architecture, Learning ArchitectureYoung people go to university with the aim of becoming architects,of finding out if they have got what it takes.What is the first thing we, LINE: 321, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: everi proper architectur learn peopl univers aim becom architect find got take first thing
TEXT: should teach them?First of all, we must explain that the person standing in front of themis not someone who asks questions whose answers he already knows.Practiclng architecture is asking oneself questions, findlng ones own, LINE: 322, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: teach first must explain person stand front themi someon question whose answer alreadi know architectur oneself question one
TEXT: answers with the help of the teacher,whittling down,findinS solutions.Over and over again.The strength of: good design lies in ourselves and in our ability to per-ceive thewor d with both emotion and reason.Agood architect!ralde-, LINE: 323, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: answer help teacher whittl solut strength good design lie abil per emot reason architect
TEXT: sign is sensuous.A good architectural design ls intelligent.We all experience architecture before we have even heard the word.The roots of architectural understanding lie in our architectural ex-p€rience: our room, our house, our street, our yillage, our town, our, LINE: 324, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sign sensuou good architectur design intellig experi architectur even word root architectur understand lie architectur room hous street town
TEXT: lafdscape-we experience them all early on, unconsciousLy, and wesubscquently compare them with the countryside, towns, and housesrhic we experience later on.The roots of our understanding of archi-rccture lie in our childhood, in our youthrthey lie ln our biography. Stu-, LINE: 325, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: experi earli unconsci compar countrysid town experi later root understand lie childhood lie biographi
TEXT: ,lcftshrvero earn !o work conscious y with lheir personal biograph-lci cxperlences of archllecture.Their rllotred tasl(s are devised !o setltr s process in morion.Wc nr.y wonder whit ic was that wc likcd ibout rhis house, this rown,, LINE: 326, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: earn work consciou person biograph process morion wonder whit wa hous
TEXT: wlnr it was thic imprcsscd rn(l l()rr ln,,l rr\ urr(l wlry.\^r'hir wis theIroom like,the square,what did it realy iook like,what smellw:s in theair, what did my footsteps sound like in it, and my voice, how did the, LINE: 327, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: wa wi like squar like footstep sound like voic
TEXT: foor feel under my feet,the door handle in my hand, how did the lightstrike the faeades, what was the shine on the walls likel Was there afeelng of narrowness or width, of intimacy or vastness?Wooden floors like light membranes, heavy stone masses, soft texti es,, LINE: 328, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: feel foot door handl hand wa shine wall wa narrow width intimaci vast wooden floor like light membran heavi stone mass soft
TEXT: polshed granite, pllable Leather, raw steel. polished mahogany, crystal-llne glass, soft asphalt warmed by the sun... the arch tect\ materials,our materials-We know them all.And yet we do not know them.ln or-, LINE: 329, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: granit leather raw steel polish mahogani crystal glass soft asphalt warm sun arch materi materi know yet know
TEXT: der to design,to invent architecture,we must learn to handle them withawareness.This is researchtthis is the work of remembering.Architecture is always concrete mattenArchitecture is not abstract, butconcrete.A plan, a project drawn on paper is not archite€ture but mer-, LINE: 330, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: design invent architectur must learn handl work architectur alway concret abstract plan project drawn paper
TEXT: ely a more or less inadequate representation of arch itectu re, compara-ble to sheet muslc.l'1usic needs to be performed. A rch itectu re needsto be executed.Then its body can come into being-And this body ls al, LINE: 331, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: less inadequ represent arch sheet need execut bodi come bodi
TEXT: ] All de\,8n wo l. \'rfls r'om Lhe o,e- \e or rl ,\ D ,ysk rl. obre( ,ive se, -sJoJsress of architecrLre. of !s naterials.To e/perierce archirecru.e lI ln a concrete way means to touch, see, hear, and smell it.To discoyer l:nd consciouslv work w!n rhese aualicies rhese rre rhe rhemes of, LINE: 332, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: concret way mean touch see hear smell work rhe
TEXT: Lour teachins.All the design worl( in the studio is done with materia s. lt always almsdirectly at concrete things, obiects, installacions made of real material(clay, stone, copper, stee , fe t, cloth, wood, plaster, brick).There are no, LINE: 333, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: lour design studio done alway concret thing made real materi clay stone copper cloth wood plaster brick
TEXT: cardboard mode s.Accun ly,no models at all in the convenc onal sense,bur concrctc obiccts, th|cc d mcnsiorrr wor (s oh i spcciflc sca c.The drawing ol scale plans also beg ns with the concrete object, thus, LINE: 334, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: cardboard mode model sens bur draw scale plan also beg concret object thu
TEXT: reversing the order o{"idea-plan-conc.ete object", which is stand-ard practice in professional architecture. First the concrete objects areconstructedi then they are drawn to scale.We carry imaSes ofworks ofarchitecture by which we have been nflu-, LINE: 335, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: revers order idea plan object stand practic profession architectur first concret object drawn scale carri
TEXT: enced around with us.We can re-invoke these images in our mind\ eyeand re-examine them. But this does notyet make a new design.new ar-chitecture. Every design needs new images. Our"old" images can only, LINE: 336, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: around invok imag mind examin doe make new design new everi design need new imag old imag
TEXT: help us to find new ones.Thinkingin images when designing is always directedtowards thewhole.By its very nature,the image is always the whole of the imagined real-lry:wal and floor, ceiling and materials, the moods of liSht:nd color of, LINE: 337, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: help find new one imag design alway natur imag alway whole real floor ceil materi mood color
TEXT: a room, for example.And we also see all the details of the transltlonslrom the foor to the wall and from the wall to the window. as if wewere watching a fiLm.Often however,they are not simply there, these visual elements of the, LINE: 338, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: room exampl also see detail wall wall window watch film often howev simpli visual element
TEXT: inrige, when we start on a design rnd try to form an image of the de-sircd object.At the beginning of the design process, the image is usualyincomp ete.So we try repeatedly to re-trrticu ate and clarify ourtheme,, LINE: 339, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: start design tri form imag object begin design process imag tri repeatedli ate clarifi
TEXT: ro idd the missing parts to our imagined picture. Or,to put it anotherwry:we design.The concrete, sens uou s quality ofour inner image helpsLrs here. k helps us not to ge! losc n arid, absrract theoretical assump-, LINE: 340, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: miss part pictur put design concret sen qualiti inner imag help arid theoret
TEXT: rionsiir helps us not to lose rrack oftlre concrete q!allties of architec-rurc.lr hclps us not to fal in love with the gr.phic quality of our drawurlts ird to confuse ! wi$ rcir irch tccturil qui ily.I'rrxhr. rg inncr intgcs s r rrrtLrtrl Ptotrsrr<,trrrontocveryone.lris, LINE: 341, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: help lose concret love qualiti confus
TEXT: 1,,r 1 of tlrrikidt.A\!o.iiriv., wi(l fi (\ , { , r , I ( , r ( ! L , r r i ( I \ysrcnrirc thinking,@'in images. in architectural, spat a , colorfrl, and sensuoLs p ct!res rhiss my favorlrc definlt on of des gn., LINE: 342, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: think imag architectur spat de
TEXT: i4I ;r -iII Does Beauty Have a Form?Apricottrees exist.ferns exist,and blackberries, too. But beauty? ls beau-ty a concrete property of a thing or an object that can be describedor named, or is it a state of mind, a human sensation? ls beauty a spe-, LINE: 343, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: doe beauti form exist fern exist blackberri beauti beau concret properti thing object state mind human sensat beauti
TEXT: cial fee ing inspired by our perception of a specia form, shape, or de-sign?What is lhe nature of a thing th:t sparl(s a sensatlon of beaLrty, thatgives us a feelinS at a certaln moment of experiencing beauty, of seeing, LINE: 344, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: fee ing inspir percept form shape sign natur thing moment beauti see
TEXT: beauty? Does beauty have a form?I Music interrupts my writing. Peter Conradin is istening to a Char esMingus recordlng of the 50s. A particular passage has caught my a!-.ention, a passage of great intensity and freedom in the calm, almost, LINE: 345, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: beauti doe beauti form music interrupt write peter char particular passag ha caught passag great intens freedom calm almost
TEXT: earthy sweep of its slow rhythm. ln the pulse of that rhythm, the ten-or saxophone spea<s in warm and rough and leisurey tones that Ixlmost understand-word by word. Booker Erwin, the sound of hishorn hard and compressed, shrill but not brittle, porous despite the, LINE: 346, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: earthi sweep slow rhythm puls rhythm ten saxophon warm rough tone understand word word booker sound hard compress shrill brittl porou despit
TEXT: densityi dry pizzlcatos in Mingus's bass; no erotic, greasy groove"rhrt seeks to disarm and conquer.The music, thus heard, might giverhe mpression of sounding stift But it isn't. lCs wonderful. lncredibly, LINE: 347, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: dri bass erot greasi groov seek disarm conquer music thu might sound wonder
TEXT: bcilriful, my son and I s.y, almost in unison, as we ook at each oth-ci I liscen.Themusic dmws me in. k is r spice. Colorfu and senslr-r . w rh depih rnd movcrncnL I inr irNidc r For r rnoment, nothing, LINE: 348, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: son almost unison spice noth
TEXT: 2 A painring by Rothko,vibrant fields of color, pure abstraction.To meit's only a question ofseeinS,a pure y visual experience,she says. Othersensualimpressions like smellor so!nd,materials or the sense oftouch, LINE: 349, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: vibrant field color pure abstract question pure visual experi say like materi sens
TEXT: don't play a role.You enter the picture you're looking at.The processhas something to do with concentration and medihtion. lt is ike me-dlration, but not with an empty mind.You're fully aleft and aware. Con-, LINE: 350, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: play role enter pictur look someth concentr empti mind fulli aleft awar con
TEXT: centration on the picture sets you free,she says.You reach another lev-3 The intenslty ofa briefexperience,the feelingofbeing utterly suspend-ed in time,beyond past and future this belongs to many, perhaps even, LINE: 351, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: pictur set free say reach anoth lev utterli suspend time beyond past futur mani perhap even
TEXT: to all sensations of beauty. Something that has the radiation of beautysrrikes a chord in me, and later, when lt is over, I say: I was completelyat one with myself and the wor d, at first ho ding my breath for a brief, LINE: 352, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sensat beauti someth ha radiat chord later say wa one first ding breath brief
TEXT: moment,then utterly absorbed and immersed,filled with wonder,fee -ingthe vibrations. effo ftlessly excited and calm as we l,enthralled bythem:gic of the appearance that has struck me. Feelings of joy. Happiness., LINE: 353, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: moment utterli absorb fill wonder fee vibrat excit calm appear ha struck feel joy happi
TEXT: The countenance of a sleepinS child, unaware of being watched. Serene,undisturbed beauty. Nothing is mediated. Everything is itseltThe flow of time has been halted, experien ce cryst: ized lnto an image, LINE: 354, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: counten child unawar watch seren undisturb beauti noth everyth flow time ha imag
TEXT: whose beauty seems to indicate depth.While the feellng lasts,I have aninkling ofthe essence ofthings,oftheir most univeEa prcperties.lnowsuspect that these lie beyond any categorles of chought.4 The Renaissance theater inV cenza. Sleep rows.The wood worn and, LINE: 355, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: whose beauti indic depth last essenc lie beyond renaiss theater sleep row wood worn
TEXT: aged, great intimacy. A powerfu s€nse o{ spacc, iftcrsity. Everything isri8ht, she srys, so :rmizin8, so nirurnl, I kc i hirnd.And :ter, the villa on the hill: She wa l<s through the countryside andsuddenly sees a jewel that tal<es her breath away. The building is ra-, LINE: 356, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: age great intimaci everyth villa hill countrysid see jewel tal breath away build
TEXT: diant.As if it belonged to the LandscaPe and the landscaPe belonged5 The beauty ofnaturetouches us as something gr€at that Soes beyondus. Man comes from nature and returns to it.An inkling of the rneasure, LINE: 357, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: landscap landscap beauti someth man come natur return inkl
TEXT: ofhuman life within the immensity ofnature wells uP inside us when wecome upon the beauty of a landscaPe that has not been domesticatedand carved down to hurnan scale.We feel sh e ltered, humble and proud, LINE: 358, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: life within immens well insid upon beauti landscap ha scale feel humbl
TEXT: at once.\ /e are in nature. in this immeasurable form that we will neverunderstand and now, in a moment of heiShtened experien.e, no ongerneed to because we sense that we ourselYes are Part of itI look out into the landscapei I gaze at the sea on the horlzon,look ar, LINE: 359, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: natur immeasur form moment sens part look gaze sea look
TEXT: the masses ofwateril walk across the fields to th€ acaciasil look at theelder blossoms,trt the juniper tree and become stillShe ls bathing in the Sicilian sea and dives under water Her heart miss-es a beal.A huge fish passes close by, silent and infinltely slow lts move-, LINE: 360, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: mass walk across field look blossom junip tree becom bath sicilian sea dive water heart miss beal huge fish pass close silent slow move
TEXT: ments are untroubled and powerful and elegant.They have the self-evi-dence of miLlennia.5 Sh e loves beautifu shoes. S he adm ires th e craftsmansh iP the materialand above al the r shape,thelr lines.She lil(es lookingalshoes,notwhen, LINE: 361, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: untroubl power eleg self millennium love shoe ire shape line
TEXT: people wear them but is obiec$ whose shaPe is strictly defined by useand whose beaury tmnsccnds pricricil dcminds unti they conre full cir-cle and say to her: Usc rnc,wcir nrc. Thc bcarrty of r utilitirian obiect, LINE: 362, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: peopl wear whose shape strictli defin whose full say
TEXT: is thc hishcst foor of borrty, slx rrklt!.7 As long as I can remember. I have a ways experiefced thc bcauty ofin artifacr, an obiect created by maf as a special presence of form, asr self'evident and self-confident hereness that is intr nsic to rhe obje.t., LINE: 363, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: long rememb way special presenc form self evid self confid here rhe
TEXT: Sometimes when such an object asserts itself in nature, I see beauty.Thc building, city, house, or street seems consc ously placed. lt gener-irtes a place.Where ir stands, there is a bacl< and a fron., there is a left, LINE: 364, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sometim object natur see beauti build citi hous street place stand left
TEXT: ind a rlghr,there is closeness and distance.an inside and outslde.thered e lorms that focus and condense or modify the landscape.The resultTlrc obiect and its environmen!:r consonance of nature and irrficii, LINE: 365, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: close distanc insid focu condens modifi landscap conson natur
TEXT: y .ieaced work that ls dlfferenr from the pure bea ty of natrre irnd.l ffcrcnt fiom the pure beauty of an object. Architeclure, the nrorhcr{l 5 re is shnding with a group of younger people, mosty architects., LINE: 366, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: work pure pure beauti object group younger peopl architect
TEXT: lr's dr zz ngi rhe a r is warm.The men and women are standing in che, ,rl tyard ofa vi i.Theiropen Lrmbrellas and sweeping, un bu lro ned €in,,,,rs lend rhem an ai. of cosmopo iran e egance.The daylight arolnd, LINE: 367, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rhe warm men woman stand che sweep lend daylight
TEXT: r rc 11orp is mild. Lighc from above shines through a sofr gray ce ing of, l,,Lras drat co! d be interpreled as a thic< ayer of fog. l. transforms ,',. ir frrc riifdrops into particles of ght.The lindscape is f lled with, LINE: 368, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: mild shine gray ing drat fog particl
TEXT: I i,. lri cs of thc nrcf rnd wonren standinB I rcre scenr serene.With un-,1,,,(!1..r1,,,(xt cir!,il ..,n.lrr rn.c, rhcy lrkc rrr drc statey manor, the , '1,'iy,rl rlrco'rtlro(scs,tlr.(J]r,,,w,,|,,,)lr,i,w,oL,ltlir rongitr.O.-, LINE: 369, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: seren manor
TEXT: , ,.,) '.,llyr(!rr.{, ! |1,!,,(,!.,r r r l,llt (,i,,ir I,,,1(, l'1,,,1 ,1.,!.,Tlir.ob ,..r,,,it,, llrt,,,r,,1y,,1.r1,,.,..-,,,t1,',. t rr.'!r,\t),,rr'E/ *.IIImeadow glisten.The meandering gaze seeks the way to theVilla Roton-, LINE: 370, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: glisten gaze seek way
TEXT: da ofAndrea Palladio,wh ch is supposed to be nearby.The sce're has be-come a Lasting image in her memory. She has written about it.9 I remember the experience othouses,villages,cities,and Landscapes,abolt whlch I now say they lent me an impression of beauty. Did these, LINE: 371, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: suppos nearbi ha come last imag memori ha written rememb experi villag citi landscap say lent impress beauti
TEXT: slruations also seem beautiful to me at the tlme? I think so. but l'm notquite sure.The impression came {irst,l suppose,and retlection fo lowed.And I l(now that certain things were not invested with beauty until af-, LINE: 372, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: also seem beauti think sure impress came suppos certain thing beauti
TEXT: terwards, through sLrbsequent impuls€s, conversations with friends, orconscious exploration ofmy stillaesthetically unclassified recollections.I can also respond to beauty that others have experienced. I assimilate, LINE: 373, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: convers friend explor unclassifi recollect also respond beauti experienc assimil
TEXT: the impression it has made on them if I am ab e to create an image inmy mind ofthe beauty others tell me about.Beauty aLways appea.s to me in settings,ln clearly delimited pieces ofreality, objectl ike or in the manner of a still ife or like a self"contained, LINE: 374, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: impress ha made creat imag mind beauti tell beauti alway set clearli piec manner still ife like self
TEXT: scene, composed to perfection without the least tr:ce of effort or ar-tificiality. Everything is as it should be;everything is in its place. Norhingjars, no overs.ated arranSement, no crt que, no accusation, no alien ln-, LINE: 375, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: scene compos perfect without least effort everyth everyth place accus alien
TEXT: tentions; no commentary, no meanlng.The experience is unintentional.What I see is the thing itself.lt captivates me.The pict!re that I see hasthe effect of a composition that appears extreme y nacunl to me and, LINE: 376, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: commentari experi unintent see thing pict see effect composit extrem
TEXT: at the same t me extreme y artful in its naturalness.l0 Sheturnsthecornerofasmal shed rnd sces the new bui ding forthe firsr time. She comes ro a halci rscon shed, electrificd. Somethingabout.he wiy drc pilared bLilding is stin.ling tlrcrc, the wiy ir is mide, LINE: 377, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: extrem art natur shed new ding time come shed ling mide
TEXT: of porous stone and glass and fine-ringed wood and the way ir forms aarge courtyard with its older neighbors the new body set down withnon-geometrical precision in the ba ance ofthe masses and materials of, LINE: 378, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: porou stone glass fine ring wood way form courtyard older neighbor new bodi set geometr precis mass materi
TEXT: the place imparts fee ings of attraction and aura. of enersy and pres-ence.lt seemed as ifeverything l saw was in a state of balanced suspen-sion.And the body o{the new building seemed to vibrate,she said., LINE: 379, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: place fee attract aura saw wa state balanc sion bodi new build vibrat said
TEXT: I I He ls standing in the porral ofSanAndrea in lYantua.A tall portico oflight and shadow, single rays of sun on the pilasters.A world of its own,no longer city but not yet the lnterior otthe church. Pigeons are flying, LINE: 380, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: stand tall portico shadow singl ray sun pilast world longer citi yet church pigeon fli
TEXT: high up in shadowy regions where the carved figures and moldings fadeout of si8ht.I hear but do not see them. Darkness abounds.The lightthar penetrates reveals fine particles of dust in the airThe air is thick,, LINE: 381, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: high shadowi region figur mold hear see dark fine particl dust air thick
TEXT: almost tactile- t seems as if the thinSs under the portico in which I amsranding, things more sensed than seen, have energized each other, as ifrhey were in a unlque state of mutuality, he says.l2 Our perception is visceral. Reason plays a secondary ro e.I think, LINE: 382, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: almost tactil portico thing sens seen state mutual say percept viscer reason play secondari think
TEXT: we mmediarely recognize beauty tha! is a product of our culture andcor csponds to our education.We see a form framed and condensedinro an emblem, r shnpe or a design, which touches us, which has the(tuility of beinga grear dealand possibly everything in one:self evident,, LINE: 383, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: recogn beauti tha product cultur educ see form frame emblem design touch ha possibl everyth one self evid
TEXT: tn ofound, myster o!s, stimulating, exciting, suspenseful...Wlrcdrer the ippearance th.r touches nre iea ly is beaurifu cannot beropcrly iudgcd by thc form 15c f bccirsc thc dcpth of fcclinS thac be-r) ,ll\ ro thc scfsir on ol bci'rry i! rr,r iltrilrr.l by rlrc fofln is slrch but, LINE: 384, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: excit suspens touch cannot form
TEXT: r,rr icr by rhc spirk rhir irrrt,\ fi,nri I r,, rIIBlt beauty cxis6 a rlrouglr it mnkcs rc irivcly rare xppeiraices xndfreq!entyinunexpecredpaces.Wh e i orher places where we woLrldexPec! r, rh stoaPPean, LINE: 385, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: beauti rare place
TEXT: Can bcaury b€ designed a rd mxde?Whit are the ftr es rhar gu antee drebeiruty ofour prodL ctsi l(nowlng iboL r coLfterpoint,harmon cs,the thcoiy ofcolo rthc Go dcf Sccrion a!rd formfolowsfLrnctior'isiotenolgh., LINE: 386, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: design whit
TEXT: McLho.s irnd devices a rhose wonderiu lnsn !menls are no substinrr. fo cofr.ni noi do thcy gLamntc. rhc inaglc of a beautifu wltole.l3 lYy las< as a design€r is diff.ult bydcfinron lt srclatcdroa_rstry afd nchieve nent, intu tion and craf.rmanship. B!t a so ro commit', LINE: 387, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: devic la design commit
TEXT: men., authentic ty, ind a deep nrerest in s!bjec! nrarrerTo ach cvc bcalry I rnusr be ar one wirh rnyse f.l mlst do m/ own thlrgn rd fo otrer because rhe parr cular subsnnce thir recognizes beaL ryandcan.wi.h rck, create it lies withif me. On thc orher hrnd,rhcthings, LINE: 388, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: men authent deep ach one rhe parr thir beal creat lie
TEXT: I wa rr to crexte r:\ble. house, br dge musr be a owed ro come in.orherown.lbe eve every we made rh ng has an lfhe.ent y appr opriatcorder rhat dcrcrnrincs its form.Tlris essence s whit I want to discover, LINE: 389, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: hous come eve everi made ha form essenc whit want discov
TEXT: and thereforestic.f flnlyrothematrerathand n thep ocessof designifg. I b. l.vc in an accuracy of olt oo < and n trrrr cortent in rea .sens!a experience, wh ch irre beyond irbsrra.t opinions or de3sWhardoes this horsc waft ro bccomc.as if obiccrof!sc,is a p rys cn, LINE: 390, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: accuraci rea sen experi beyond opinion waft
TEXT: body, irs riri.e ials f rrnly consrrrcted.'r.llo re.. ts lhirpe fro ded ntoaform rharserves f€/Iis< nyscf rrdrsl.sorr.fro cWlritdocsthis ho!s.wirriobclo L!b(rtbr,)r1r!,riy,r !,. ,r r',,r,1 1,.,, rLrr:barrerc| rnrlrlt,(,.(n, rli( 1, ,,i 1,(f L,n ,.,r i rl,n '(,l,r,w'riflht prthov. 1,,,1. ,,, 'il ,,r , i, L'rl,1 r,i,r, LINE: 391, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: bodi fro fro
TEXT: I iII 4 "Ap ricot trees exist, apricot rrees exist/ Ferns exisq an d b lacl<ber,The beginning ofthis essay as wel as the lines that fol ow are indebted!o lnger Chr stensen, whose poem 'Alphabet" begins with these linesi, LINE: 392, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: tree exist apricot exist fern ber begin essay line indebt whose poem alphabet begin
TEXT: her poem builds on the infinitely increas ng rhythm of the Fibonaccinumbers, a condensation of words in which she securcs the world andIh^r"by ei"r\es parL cles rl-at ,parJe ana rricrre.The lune night exisrs.The lune night exists ..., LINE: 393, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: poem build infinit rhythm condens word world ana lune night lune night
TEXT: in this flying summer, no one understands that autumn exis.s,the aftertaste and the alterthouSht,too, onLy the dizzying series ofthisrestless ukra-sound exists and the jade ear ofthebat turned toward the ticl<ing haze;, LINE: 394, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: fli summer one autumn aftertast seri sound jade ear turn toward ing haze
TEXT: never has the earths inclination been so splendid,never the zinc-white nights so white ...Beauty,l think as I read these lines, is at its most intense when lr is bornof absence. l fi nd something missing,a compell nS expression,an empa-, LINE: 395, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: never ha earth inclin splendid never zinc white night white beauti think read line intens absenc someth miss express
TEXT: thy,which lnstant y affects me when I experlence beauty. Before the ex-perience, I did not realize or perhaps no longer knew that I missed t,bul now I am persuaded by knowledge renewed rhrt I wi I a wrys miss, LINE: 396, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: thi affect beauti realiz perhap longer knew persuad knowledg miss
TEXT: it. Lonsins.The exper ence of beir!ty makes me iwirc of ibscf .e.WharI experiefcc,whic touchcs nrc. cntiils bodr ioy an.l pirin Pi r)ful is rhcexper ence ofabsence and pure bliss the experjence of a beautifulform, LINE: 397, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: make pure bliss
TEXT: that has been lsnited by the feelins of absence. in the words of wrterMaftin Walser:"The more we mlss sonrething, the more beautiful maybecome that which we have to mobilize ln order to endure absen.el', LINE: 398, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ha absenc word beauti mobil order endur
TEXT: ..ryl ::The Magic of the RealThere s the maglc of music.The sonata begins wth the first des.end-ingmeodic ineof thevola,theplano sets in,andthereltisaLready,therismntaneo!s presence of a dlstinct emotionithe atrnosPhere of sound, LINE: 399, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: magic music sonata begin first de end set presenc sound
TEXT: rhir envelops and touches me,that plts nie in a special mood.lhere is the magic ol paintlng and poetry, of words and images, there,\ dre magic of radiant thoughts.And there is the magic of the rea, ofrhe physical.of substance, ofthe things around me thar l see and rouch., LINE: 400, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: touch special mood magic poetri word imag magic radiant thought magic rea physic substanc thing around thar see
TEXT: rli,rr smell and hear. Sometlmes, at certain moments, the magc cofv.ycd by a specific archilecture or landscape. a specific milieu. is sud-,l(,nly rherei i! has materia ized like the measured growth of che soul,, LINE: 401, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: smell hear certain moment specif landscap specif milieu sud ha like measur growth che soul
TEXT: Lr \ lY;rrndyThursday. l'm sitting n the long loggia of the c oth ha l. Facrr,1 rhc panorama of the square, its row of bui d ngs, ts chlrch and its,ii,rrunients. lYy back to the wall of the cafe.just the rlght amount of, LINE: 402, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sit long loggia panorama squar row back wall amount
TEXT: ti,1)l)lc.A fowcr mar(et.ln lhe sun.lts ll a.nr.The wall on the oppo-.,r( srdc of rhe squrre lies in shadow, bnthed ln a p easant bluish li8ht.W,ir.lo{ul sounds: convers.tions close by,footsteps on the flagston€s, LINE: 403, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: mar sun wall rhe lie shadow bluish sound close footstep
TEXT: ' l 1 ic squ c, fie murnrlrinr< ofthe crowd (no cars, no engine noise),,{r,,. ri i whilcdstantsorfdsof .onslrucLiof.Birds.blacl(dots nflight,, r,,.y l1)(,1< ciscr flrf .hccdrl,i fist ind irssc.l pitrern of lnes lf the air, LINE: 404, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: fie crowd car engin nois bird dot fist air
TEXT: llr,. r(, ( ,ryi hivc jrst bcSun irxl \.rrr r(, lnvc slowcd .lowrr $e wil<,,rl t, i, ( ,)l rlic pc()tn, . lw(, ,r ,i\, l, ,tlrly )t( \r ( rrl,r( rU. rrrikc rhc t wiy',',r. rlr'(,,i1 ,rrtLL,,(i Jlir l,r,r,, L,,, 1,, ', ),1, l)11)wrrrlt nrli( w,,rl, LINE: 405, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: ,.:j q! f ,-' {Each carryinga plastic bag.The rem perature is pleasantly invigoraringandwarm at once.I am sltting on a couch upholstered in pate,faded greenvelvet.The bronze statue on a high p inth on the square jn front of me, LINE: 406, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: plastic bag pleasantli couch upholst pate fade bronz statu high squar front
TEXT: has its bac< to me and joins me in ookingatthe twin{pired church.Thespires each have different pinnaclesj they are identicat when $ey srartout at the bottom and become increasing y distinct toward the top.One, LINE: 407, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ha bac join twin church differ bottom becom increas distinct toward top one
TEXT: is taler than che other and has a gold croe/n.Soon B. is goinS to appearto the right, wall<ing toward me diaSonally across the square.At the time that I wro.e these comments about the atmosphere ofthesquare. I was urterly enchanted with everythinS I saw Rereading my, LINE: 408, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: taler che ha gold soon right wall ing toward across squar time wro comment atmospher wa saw
TEXT: notes now I wonder v/hat it was that moved me so much.Everything!Everything the things.the people,the quality of the air,theight,the noises,the sounds and the colors. Material prese nce, tex.u resand shapes as wel. Forms that I can understand. Contigurations rhat I, LINE: 409, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: note wonder hat wa much everyth everyth thing peopl qualiti air nois sound color materi shape form understand
TEXT: can try to read. Physiognomies that strike me as beautifut.But apart from : I the physica materials, apart from the things and thepeop e, there was something else that touched me was it somethingrelated to me alone, to my rnood, my feelings, nry expectations as I sat, LINE: 410, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: tri read physiognomi strike apart materi apart thing wa someth els touch wa alon feel expect sat
TEXT: lhere watching and lisreningl"Beauty is in the eyes of the beho der"-this sentence comes to mindas I write. Does it mean that everyrhing I experienced at the time wasprimarily the expression and the oucflow of my srace of mind, of the, LINE: 411, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: watch beauti eye sentenc come write doe mean experienc time express mind
TEXT: mood that I happened to be in at rhe moment? Did the experjence ut-timate y have little to do with the square and rs acmosphere?ln order to answer .hat quest of, conduct a simp c experimenr I dis-miss the square from 'ny mind afd che nomenr I do so. a curious thinS, LINE: 412, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: mood rhe moment littl squar order answer hat quest conduct simp di miss squar mind che curiou
TEXT: happens: che fcclinSs evokcd by rhc sillririon trcltii ro f,r.tc ird cventhr&ten to disappearWithout the atmosPhere of the square, I real-ze I would never have experienced those feelings. Now lt comes bac<, LINE: 413, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: che ten atmospher squar real would never experienc feel come bac
TEXT: to me:there is an intimate re ationship between our emotions and thethings around us.Thatthought is related to my job as an archhect.lworkat the forms, the physiognomies, at the physlcal Presence of the thlngs, LINE: 414, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: intim emot around relat job form physiognomi presenc
TEXT: that constitute the spaces n which we live.ln my worl(, I contribute torhe existing physlcal framewor (, to the atmosphere of Places and sPac-es that kindle o!r emotions.The maglc of the real: that to me is the "alchemy' of rransforming re-, LINE: 415, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: constitut space live contribut atmospher place kindl emot real alchemi
TEXT: al substances into human sensations, of creating that sPecial momentwhen matler, the substance and form of architecrural sPace, can trulybe emotionally appropriated or assimilated.As an architect, I can construct worl<able ho iday homes, commercir, LINE: 416, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: substanc human sensat special substanc form space emot architect construct abl home
TEXT: buildings,or airportsil can buid flats with good lloor p ans rt affordablep.ices: I can design theaters,trrt museums, or show rooms thar make animpacti I can app y forms to my buildings that satisfy the need for lnno-, LINE: 417, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: build flat good ice design theater museum show room thar make form build satisfi need
TEXT: vatlon or novelty, sratus or lifestyle.It is not easy .o do those things- lt takes worl( And talent. And morework. But thatalone is not enough to come up with comPelling,success-fularchirecture bornofthosespecia momentsof Persona architectural, LINE: 418, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: novelti easi thing take talent enough come compel success persona architectur
TEXT: experience. and it makes me wonder:can l, as an architect, invest whatI design wlrh whatever it is that actually constltutes the essence of anarchitectura atmosphere? Can I create that unique feeLlng of intensi!y, LINE: 419, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: experi make wonder architect invest design whatev actual essenc atmospher creat uniqu
TEXT: and mood, of prescnce, well-be ng, righl|ess and beauryl ls it Possiblero glve concre.e shape to dlt which .lcfincs rhe nrig c of the real at aspecifc lnomcnq ro drc spcll 1li.,r I cists on nry cxpc-iefce of it, con, LINE: 420, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: mood well es shape rhe real con
TEXT: i(lring i .tLrility thir I w,,Lr,l rnv, (n!iw1, (iln,ri(irrcc?There are small and large. impressive:nd important buildings or com-plexes that dwarf me,that oppress me, that exclude or reb!ff me. Butthere also buidings orensembles ofbuildings.both smallones and mo-, LINE: 421, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: thir small larg impress import build dwarf oppress exclud reb also
TEXT: numental ones,that make mefee good,thar make me look good, thatgive me a sense ofdignity and freedom,that ma<e me want to st:y awh leand that I enjoy using.These are the works I feel passion for.So e/hen l'rn working,lkeep remindinS rnyselfthat my buildings are bod-, LINE: 422, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: one make good thar make look good sens freedom want enjoy work feel passion hen work build bod
TEXT: ies and need to be built accordingly: as anatomy and sl<in, as mass andmembrane, as fab ric, shell, velvet, silk.and glossy steel.Itry to mal<e sure thatthe materials are attuned to each othetthat they, LINE: 423, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: need built accordingli anatomi mass shell velvet silk glossi steel mal sure materi
TEXT: radiatei I take a cerrain amo!nr of oak and a different amount of pietrdserend and add something to them:three Srams ofsilv€r or a handle thatturns or maybe surfaces of gleaming glass, so that every combination of, LINE: 424, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: take oak differ amount add someth three handl mayb surfac gleam glass everi combin
TEXT: marerials yields a uni!ue composition, becomes an origin"l.I isten to the sound ofthe space,to the way materlals and surfaces re-spond to touching and tapping, and to the silence that is a prerequi-site of hearing., LINE: 425, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: yield composit becom origin sound space way surfac touch tap silenc site hear
TEXT: The temperature of rooms is very important to me.how coolthey are,how refreshing, the chiaroscuro of warmth that caresses our bodies.I love thinking about the personal thlngs that p€op e surround them-, LINE: 426, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: temperatur room import refresh chiaroscuro warmth caress bodi love think person surround
TEXT: selves with in order to work.ln order to feel at home and tor which Icreate room, sPace, and Place.I like the idea of arranginS the inner structures of my buildings in se'quences of rooms char Suide us, cake us places, but also let us go, LINE: 427, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: self order work order feel home tor room space place like idea inner structur build room char cake place also let
TEXT: and seduce !s. Architecrurc s Lhc art of sp:rce :rnd it is the nrt ofrme as well bcrwcen ordcr and f|ccdorr, bcrwccn followifg. pa$06and discovering a path of our own,wandering, strolling, being seduced., LINE: 428, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: seduc art well path wander
TEXT: I give thought to careful and conscious staging of tension between in-side and outside,public and intimate,and to rh res holds, transitions, andAnd to the play of sca e in architecrure. l"ly dedication to finding the, LINE: 429, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: give thought care consciou stage tension side outsid public intim hold transit play dedic find
TEXT: right size of thlngs is motivated by the deslre to create degrees of in-timacy, of closeness and distance. I ove p acing materials, surtaces, andedges, shiny and mat, in the light of the sun, and generating deep so ids, LINE: 430, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: right size creat degre close distanc materi shini mat light sun gener deep id
TEXT: and gradations of shadinS and darkness for the magic of light fal lng on!h ngs. Unti everything is right.The Light in the LandscapeThe light of the moonThe llght of the moon is a quiet reflection,large, even, and rnild.The, LINE: 431, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: gradat dark magic light everyth right light light moon quiet reflect larg even
TEXT: light of the moon comes from far away.That makes l! quiet. I imaginethe shadows that things cast on the earth in the light of the moon im-perceptibly seeking se paration. Though I cant te I with my bare eyes., LINE: 432, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: light moon come far away make quiet shadow thing cast earth light moon percept seek though cant bare eye
TEXT: l'm too small or too close to make out the cosmic ang e between thesource of light and the things lt illuminates on earth.When I start studying light and shadow, the light and shadow of themoon, the light and shadow of the sun, the light and the shadows pro-, LINE: 433, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: small close make cosmic light thing earth start light shadow light shadow light shadow sun light shadow pro
TEXT: duced by the larnp in my living room, I acquire a sense of scale and diI have always wanted to write a book about lght. can think of nothingthar reminds me more of eternity,says Andrzej Stasiu< in his bool( The, LINE: 434, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: live room acquir sens scale alway write book think etern say bool
TEXT: World behind Dukla.Events or objects stop or djsappear or colapse un'der their own weight and when I lool< at them and describe them, hesays, it is only because they refract lght, because they shape it and give, LINE: 435, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: world behind event object stop weight describ refract shape give
TEXT: r a form thar we are capable of understand ng.The light that meets the earth from afarI wrnL Lo tlrink about .he ar rlficial ght n nry b!ildin8s, in our cities andin ot]r lifdsc.pes, ind citch nrysc f forcvcr retlr r fg,like a lover !o, LINE: 436, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: form thar capabl understand light meet earth citi like lover
TEXT: rhc obicct of nry idrriritior:tlrc itlir ilrit nrccts tlrc crrdr f om a{iithc !rrLokl nLIrbcr5 ()f ll!lr\ \rrL ( 1, or, rrrtt i,rls lr(tLr.ls. srrfi.cs,colol.s, and shapes that radiate in the light.The light that cornes from, LINE: 437, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: shape radiat light light
TEXT: ollside the earth makes the air visib e,l can see it.ln the Upper Enga-dine in autumn,for example,where the sl(ies are aready southern butSeen from a great heightSeen from a great helght, the artlficia lights with which people illlrmi-, LINE: 438, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: earth make air see upper dine autumn exampl southern great great light peopl
TEXT: nate the night have a soothing effect.We ilLuminate our buildings andstreets,we illuminate our planet, ward off litt e pieces of darkness andcreate is ands of ight on whlch we can see ourselves and the things that, LINE: 439, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: night sooth effect illumin build illumin planet ward piec dark see thing
TEXT: we have accumulated around us.Sensing,smellinS,touching,tasting,dreaming in the dark-thatt just notenough.We want to see. But how much lght do people need in order.o live?And how much darknesslls there a spiritua conditlon or a life conditlon so sensitive that tiny, LINE: 440, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: around touch tast dark want see much peopl need order live much life sensit tini
TEXT: amounts of llght would be enough to ensure a good life? Or,to go evenfurther:Are there some thlngs we can experience only in dark, shadedplaces, in the darl<ness of night?Two hunters from San Bernardino,who spent a few days and nights in an, LINE: 441, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: amount would enough ensur good life experi dark ness night two san spent day night
TEXT: uncivilzed mountaln valley. describe coming home at n ght and oo<ingdown on their illuminated viLlage-the tunne entrance,the gas station,the cal.s and how the familnr village suddenly seemed pol uted.Tanizaki Jun'ichiro, the author of ln Pro,se of Shodows, once decided, LINE: 442, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: valley describ come home illumin villag entranc ga station cal villag suddenli pol author pro decid
TEXT: to watch the full moon at the lshiyama Temp e, bur changed his mlndwhen he learned lhat rhey wolld p ay a record ng of rhe Mooniight So-notd for the enter.ainmenr of the vis Lors .nd insrill irri{ic rl ghts ro, LINE: 443, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: watch full moon temp bur learn record rhe enter lor
TEXT: The light of the sunMyriad small dots of light the stars in the sky,llre{lies in the woods, therrtificial lights of nightscapes on earth. Small objects of liSht that radi-ate or reflect.The glass beads in a ch:ndelier, for example., LINE: 444, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: light small dot light star sky lie wood light earth small object ate reflect glass bead exampl
TEXT: The lighr ofthe sun, rhe day, that reaches the sufface o{the eafth fromouter space,ls big and strong and directed. lt is one light.Darkness lives in the earthRecently, on a mountain hil(e,A. observed that the co ors of lheA pine, LINE: 445, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: sun rhe day reach space big strong direct one light dark life mountain pine
TEXT: flowers a on8 the path are stil aglow for a little bit after twiliSht hasfallen, as if the flowers had stored the light and now have to release lr,Darkness lives in the earth.lt rises up out of it and returns !o il lke a, LINE: 446, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: flower path aglow littl bit flower light releas dark life earth rise return
TEXT: strong breath, I read in Andrzel Stasiu<'s Duklo.The older I get,the mo.e inrense is my interest in the var ous ways andforms in which light appears in nature.lam amazed,l learn from that,and I am aware that it is the light of the sln that il uminates the build-, LINE: 447, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: strong breath read older get interest way light natur lam amaz learn awar light build
TEXT: ings I envision. I hold spaces, materials, textures, colors, sur{aces, andshapes up to the lSht of the sun: I capture this ight, refect it,filter it,screen it offi I thin it out to create a usterintherghtspot.Lightasan, LINE: 448, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: envis hold space materi textur color sur ace sun captur refect filter screen thin creat
TEXT: agent, L'm familiar with it. But when L really starr thinking about it,I un-derstand hardly anything.The light in the landscapefte Lrghr in e Ld,)ds.ope. Fr ederike lYiyroc<er uses dris imrge to title i text that secms cxr-cnrcy rr iobiogriplricrl to nrc. lts rn:rny shades, LINE: 449, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: agent familiar realli think hardli anyth light ope us titl text shade
TEXT: in.l shidows kccp brcrkrrll ,nr rirl u,'(, 'lru ||lir i\ slrc pilcs rp rhcmateri:l of her words layer upon layer, describing and creating innerand outer landscapes.Personal landscapes. lmaSes and landscapes of longing, mourning, tran-, LINE: 450, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: word layer upon layer outer landscap person landscap landscap long mourn
TEXT: quility, joy,lone iness, sanctuary, ugliness,the pretension of pride, seduc-fion. ln my meno y Lhe/ all have a li8hc of cheir own.ls it even possib e to imagine thinSs without light?Tanizal(iJun'ichiro praises shadows.ln the dark deprhs ofthe traditional, LINE: 451, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: joy lone sanctuari ugli pretens pride cheir even imagin without light prais shadow dark tradit
TEXT: Japanese home.where shadows crouch in all the corners.the gold of alacquer painting glearns,and gentle lighr is diffused through translucentpaper stretched over the delicate wooden frame of a sliding door so, LINE: 452, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: home shadow crouch corner gold paint gentl diffus delic wooden frame slide door
TEXT: that one can hardly distinguish the source of the daylight that capturesand reflects the objects so beautifully in the half light.Jun ichiro praises shadows.And shadows praise light.Shadowl€ss modernism, LINE: 453, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: one hardli distinguish sourc daylight object beauti half light prais shadow shadow prais light modern
TEXT: lf I remember righty,l h:ve seen buildings of classical modernism thatcelebrate the light and the landscape. Richard Neutra's houses in Cali-fornia,for example.Shadows do not seem to loom large in these archi-, LINE: 454, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: rememb righti seen build classic modern light landscap hous exampl shadow seem loom larg
TEXT: tectural compositions. But brightness does.light and air and the out-door view the sensation of liv'ng in the landscape, of having the land-scape flow into or through the rooms inside the landscape with all of, LINE: 455, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: composit bright doe light air door view sensat landscap land scape flow room insid landscap
TEXT: its llShts trnd shadows.Watching the sun set in these houses is a mag-niflcent experience. Later,when the house is no longer illuminated fromoutside, it has to generate its own liShting, its own illuminated atmo$, LINE: 456, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: shadow watch sun set hous mag experi later hous longer illumin ha gener illumin atmo
TEXT: phere.With human light.LosAngeles by nightSeen {rom an approachinS aircraft that is gradually losing altitude, thenighttime illumination of Los Angeles looks like a magical image. Later,on the streets of the city,that same light seems pal id and sickly to me,, LINE: 457, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: human light aircraft gradual lose altitud illumin look like magic imag later street citi light pal sickli
TEXT: an unnaturalbrightness in which the green lawns and bushes in thefrontyards ofthe houses lool( as if they were rnade o{ plastic.Between sunset and sunriseBetween sunset and sunrise. we furnish ourselv€s with illumination of, LINE: 458, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: green lawn bush hous plastic sunset sunset sunris furnish illumin
TEXT: our own making,lights that we can switch on at will.These lights ctrn-not be compared to daylight;they are too weak and too breathless withthelr flickering intensities and swiftly spreading shado!vs.But when I do not thinl< ofthese lights th:t we mal<e ourselves as an at-, LINE: 459, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: make light switch light daylight weak breathless flicker intens spread light mal
TEXT: tempt to eliminate darkness, when I think of them as nighFtime lights,as accentuated night,as intimate illuminated cLearings thatwe carve outof the darkness. then they can become beautiful, then they can haye a, LINE: 460, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: tempt elimin dark think light night intim illumin clear carv dark becom beauti
TEXT: magic all their own.Which lights do we want to switch on between sunset and sunriselWhat do v/e v/ant to iLluminate in our buildings, cities. and landscapes?How and for how long?IIIAwny of Looking atThingt, LINE: 461, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: magic light want switch sunset ant illumin build citi landscap long look
TEXT: Le.ture, written November 1933, SC ARC Southern Ca lo nlr nnnute ofArchtectore.The Hard Core ofB€autyLecture.wrtten December 99,s/mposum P ran,SoveniaFrom a Passion ro.Things to th€ThingsThemselvesLecture,wi.tenAuBu$!994,AvarAatoSymposium,A'rhite.tureoftheEssentirl,', LINE: 462, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: written arc southern hard core ran passion thing
TEXT: The Body ofAr.hitectureLecture,writren Ocrober 996,Symposium FomFollowsAn/lhlnsl'Siockholm,swedenTeachina Archite.ture, LearningArchite.turewrten September l995.Accademxd archilettura,l'lendrsio.Swee.and, LINE: 463, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: bodi symposium
TEXT: Does Beauty Have a Form?Slghty revked venion otrhe edureon thesublectot venu*asl'Eiven atthe D€parrmentofA..h te.ture ofthe Federd lnntuteofTechnoogrZu ich.November 1998Thequo.edpa$a8esarefromthepoen Alphabef'n nger Christensen.En.henis.hes 6+, LINE: 464, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: doe beauti form ich
TEXT: dl.ht zu Ehrcn det Etde,Auswahl oh,e Anfong ohne E de,ednen b/ P€rerwate' rouie {sa zburgandV enia: Res donzVelag, 1997)The Masic of the R€alLe.toDdctonls,de veren lODecember2O0lontheoccasonoltheLaurcaHonoft cau-, LINE: 465, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: 
TEXT: sa inArchnetiura awa.d ofthe Univehiti degiStud d Ferara. Frco tI diArchiterturaThe Light in the Landscap€Le.ture,wlitren as plrtofrre Nrtiona Rese .rProrc.r'FarLux_fori cidn8ittheBa'Faena in Chii$o lA!s!*200,1, LINE: 466, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: awa light
TEXT: Peter ZumthorBorn ln Baselin l943,trained as a cabinetmal(ei designer,and architectat the Kunstgewerbeschule Basel :nd Pratt lnstitute, NewYork. Since1979 own practice in Haldenstein, Switzerland. Professor at the Ac-, LINE: 467, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: peter train design sinc practic professor
TEXT: cademia di arch;tettura, UniversitA della Svizzera italiana.Chur, I 986i Sogn Benedetg Chopel, Su rnvitg, I 988; Ho rf,es for Senior Atizens,Chur-Masans, 1993i fhermai Boths yojs, 1996i KunsthdLrs Bregenz, 1997:, LINE: 468, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: arch senior
TEXT: Swiss Povilion Expo 2040, Hannaver Documentotian Centet "Topographyoflerror", Berlin, constructed parts of 1997 demolished 2004 by Ber-lin StateiArt ,Museum Ko/Lrmbd, Cologne, 2007i Sdjnt Eruder Klous Fie/d, LINE: 469, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: swiss berlin part ber lin museum fie
TEXT: Chdpei, Scheidtweiler farm, Mechernich, Germany, 2007.C) Phoros.aphsr Liuia P3d8eft . Fli)n <f!rr/rhin.mkeri in rhe Z!nr$or rcs de.ce,luly 2005Lryour rnd Cover:Hifrcte cront!nd, Hc s ntQr ex6:Percr ZL,m$o: Hatdenstein, LINE: 470, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: farm eft rhe cover
TEXT: T anslir.ion:f1a!rcci Oberti turfcr (ess:rys t988 996), Car|criie Schclbert (cssays t998 2004):r lfl:iA r- P.rhl.Er o rc..ra lff tris h.o. : rvi rL. t oir rt[ L b irr ot Ccrgt5j.Bb.! iph. nlo m .n prb sh.d bt De DoLE.re Bb othei Lre Dcurd,e B b .iheti n: ih s pubt. .r n tre DeLG.he Niro Ibb .!r]I. Deo .d bihr.!rrpr. drlt s in ibc I dre I rc rer :( hrpridnr Jdb de, LINE: 471, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ion es car dole
TEXT: riwo,( !srbi. b.!p/i8hrA ilnsi.r.!e.!.d wre.r.r dr.wh... p:rolr.F. rir . f d.l rr.. per ir ar.n.I nr...p/ ch1 owre. n b.. r,r n.dTh t boo< !: r. rvr rh. , I ce nin rrgr.r. cn !.i L sgt.t j t643 t49tr r\, LINE: 472, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: per boo
TEXT: F ' i.d r.r 1993. LJ s Mr . pnr trc 5 B:..n S{,., .r id Ret m 999 iid se..i...rp: rdc. .dt., )106 B, anrsc, Plb ishe s L A .ri.q( . BI. 5w u., , ra:j)0068 nhrls€ prblrrtorAarL..Li. j()p r |.tH,11Jrnr. !wr,.r,l P t.IS, rBo S. enrc+B!. , rj M.. l d, D Architectuurbibliotheek SinlLucas Brussel, LINE: 473, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: ret
TEXT: hoges.hool voor Wetc is.hilr.n K!nst5BN r 17R I /a|,.r)/ t Vendor.ode !r.B f 4 l:jl I lf l r,,vorce,,,,,,f., '.i1..),t*lLlr:a*""-.--. loo( rl)(irr0i 7?.() u z.unllto((. I r ),(lrlr ru rl,i,r /'/,,f&/', LINE: 474, BOOK: Thinking Architecture by Peter Zumthor, KEYWORD: vendor ode loo
